original text$enter theseus hippolyta and philostrate with others$theseus now fair hippolyta our nuptial hour draws on apace. four happy days bring in another moon. but oh methinks how slow this old moon wanes she lingers my desires like to a stepdame or a dowager long withering out a young mans revenue.$hippolyta four days will quickly steep themselves in night. four nights will quickly dream away the time. and then the moon like to a silver bow new bent in heaven shall behold the night of our solemnities.$theseus go philostrate stir up the athenian youth to merriments. awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. turn melancholy forth to funerals. the pale companion is not for our pomp.$exit philostrate$hippolyta i wooed thee with my sword and won thy love doing thee injuries. but i will wed thee in another key with pomp with triumph and with reveling.$enter egeus and his daughter hermia and lysander and demetrius$egeus happy be theseus our renowned duke.$original text$theseus thanks good egeus. whats the news with thee$egeus full of vexation come i with complaint against my child my daughter hermia. stand forth demetrius.my noble lord this man hath my consent to marry her. stand forth lysander.and my gracious duke this man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. thou thou lysander thou hast given her rhymes and interchanged love tokens with my child. thou hast by moonlight at her window sung with feigning voice verses of feigning love and stol'n the impression of her fantasy with bracelets of thy hair rings gauds conceits knacks trifles nosegays sweetmeatsmessengers of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. with cunning hast thou filched my daughters heart turned her obedience which is due to me to stubborn harshness.and my gracious duke be it so she will not here before your grace consent to marry with demetrius i beg the ancient privilege of athens. as she is mine i may dispose of her which shall be either to this gentleman or to her deathaccording to our law immediately provided in that case.$theseus what say you hermia be advised fair maid to you your father should be as a god one that composed your beauties yea and one to whom you are but as a form in wax by him imprinted and within his power to leave the figure or disfigure it. demetrius is a worthy gentleman.$original text$hermia so is lysander.$theseus in himself he is. but in this kind wanting your fathers voice the other must be held the worthier.$hermia i would my father looked but with my eyes.$theseus rather your eyes must with his judgment look.$hermia i do entreat your grace to pardon me. i know not by what power i am made bold nor how it may concern my modesty in such a presence here to plead my thoughts but i beseech your grace that i may know the worst that may befall me in this case if i refuse to wed demetrius.$theseus either to die the death or to abjure forever the society of men. therefore fair hermia question your desires. know of your youth. examine well your blood whether if you yield not to your fathers choice you can endure the livery of a nun for aye to be in shady cloister mewed to live a barren sister all your life chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. thriceblessed they that master so their blood to undergo such maiden pilgrimage. but earthlier happy is the rose distilled than that which withering on the virgin thorn grows lives and dies in single blessedness.$original text$hermia so will i grow so live so die my lord ere i will yield my virgin patent up unto his lordship whose unwished yoke my soul consents not to give sovereignty.$theseus take time to pause and by the next new moon the sealing day betwixt my love and me for everlasting bond of fellowship upon that day either prepare to die for disobedience to your fathers will or else to wed demetrius as he would or on dianas altar to protest for aye austerity and single life.$demetrius relent sweet hermiaand lysander yield thy crazed title to my certain right.$lysander you have her fathers love demetrius. let me have hermias. do you marry him.$egeus scornful lysander true he hath my love and what is mine my love shall render him. and she is mine and all my right of her i do estate unto demetrius.$lysander to theseus i am my lord as well derived as he as well possessed. my love is more than his. my fortunes every way as fairly ranked if not with vantage as demetrius'. andwhich is more than all these boasts can be i am beloved of beauteous hermia. why should not i then prosecute my right demetrius ill avouch it to his head made love to nedars daughter helena and won her soul. and she sweet lady dotes devoutly dotes dotes in idolatry upon this spotted and inconstant man.$original text$theseus i must confess that i have heard so much and with demetrius thought to have spoke thereof but being overfull of selfaffairs my mind did lose it.but demetrius come. and come egeus. you shall go with me. i have some private schooling for you both. for you fair hermia look you arm yourself to fit your fancies to your fathers will or else the law of athens yields you up which by no means we may extenuate to death or to a vow of single life. come my hippolyta. what cheer my love demetrius and egeus go along. i must employ you in some business against our nuptial and confer with you of something nearly that concerns yourselves.$egeus with duty and desire we follow you.$exeunt. manent lysander and hermia$lysander how now my love why is your cheek so pale how chance the roses there do fade so fast$hermia belike for want of rain which i could well beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.$lysander ay me for aught that i could ever read could ever hear by tale or history the course of true love never did run smooth. but either it was different in blood$original text$hermia o cross too high to be enthralled to low.$lysander or else misgraffed in respect of years$hermia o spite too old to be engaged to young.$lysander or else it stood upon the choice of friends$hermia o hell to choose love by anothers eyes$lysander or if there were a sympathy in choice war death or sickness did lay siege to it making it momentary as a sound swift as a shadow short as any dream brief as the lightning in the collied night that in a spleen unfolds both heaven and earth and ere a man hath power to say behold the jaws of darkness do devour it up. so quick bright things come to confusion.$hermia if then true lovers have been ever crossed it stands as an edict in destiny. then let us teach our trial patience because it is a customary cross as due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs wishes and tears poor fancys followers.$lysander a good persuasion. therefore hear me hermia. i have a widow aunt a dowager of great revenue and she hath no child. from athens is her house remote seven leagues and she respects me as her only son. there gentle hermia may i marry thee. and to that place the sharp athenian law cannot pursue us. if thou lovest me then steal forth thy fathers house tomorrow night. and in the wood a league without the town$original text$where i did meet thee once with helena to do observance to a morn of may there will i stay for thee.$hermia my good lysander i swear to thee by cupids strongest bow by his best arrow with the golden head by the simplicity of venus' doves by that which knitteth souls and prospers loves and by that fire which burned the carthage queen when the false troyan under sail was seen by all the vows that ever men have broke in number more than ever women spoke in that same place thou hast appointed me tomorrow truly will i meet with thee.$lysander keep promise love. look here comes helena.$enter helena$hermia godspeed fair helena whither away$helena call you me fair that fair again unsay. demetrius loves your fair. o happy fair your eyes are lodestars and your tongues sweet air more tunable than lark to shepherds ear when wheat is green when hawthorn buds appear. sickness is catching. oh were favor so yours would i catch fair hermia ere i go. my ear should catch your voice. my eye your eye. my tongue should catch your tongues sweet melody. were the world mine demetrius being bated the rest id give to be to you translated.$original text$o teach me how you look and with what art you sway the motion of demetrius' heart.$hermia i frown upon him yet he loves me still.$helena oh that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill$hermia i give him curses yet he gives me love.$helena oh that my prayers could such affection move$hermia the more i hate the more he follows me.$helena the more i love the more he hateth me.$hermia his folly helena is no fault of mine.$helena none but your beauty. would that fault were mine$hermia take comfort. he no more shall see my face. lysander and myself will fly this place. before the time i did lysander see seemed athens as a paradise to me. oh then what graces in my love do dwell that he hath turned a heaven unto a hell$lysander helen to you our minds we will unfold. tomorrow night when phoebe doth behold her silver visage in the watery glass decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass a time that lovers' flights doth still conceal through athens' gates have we devised to steal.$hermia to helena and in the wood where often you and i upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet$original text$there my lysander and myself shall meet. and thence from athens turn away our eyes to seek new friends and stranger companies. farewell sweet playfellow. pray thou for us. and good luck grant thee thy demetrius keep word lysander. we must starve our sight from lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.$lysander i will my hermia.$exit hermia$helena adieu. as you on him demetrius dote on you$exit lysander$helena how happy some o'er other some can be through athens i am thought as fair as she. but what of that demetrius thinks not so. he will not know what all but he do know. and as he errs doting on hermias eyes so i admiring of his qualities. things base and vile holding no quantity love can transpose to form and dignity. love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. and therefore is winged cupid painted blind. nor hath loves mind of any judgment taste wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste. and therefore is love said to be a child because in choice he is so oft beguiled. as waggish boys in game themselves forswear so the boy love is perjured everywhere. for ere demetrius looked on hermias eyne he hailed down oaths that he was only mine.$original text$and when this hail some heat from hermia felt so he dissolved and showers of oaths did melt. i will go tell him of fair hermias flight. then to the wood will he tomorrow night pursue her. and for this intelligence if i have thanks it is a dear expense. but herein mean i to enrich my pain to have his sight thither and back again.$exit$original text$enter quince the carpenter and snug the joiner and bottom the weaver and flute the bellowsmender and snout the tinker and starveling the tailor$quince is all our company here$bottom you were best to call them generally man by man according to the scrip.$quince here is the scroll of every mans name which is thought fit through all athens to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess on his wedding day at night.$bottom first good peter quince say what the play treats on then read the names of the actors and so grow to a point.$quince marry our play is the most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of pyramus and thisbe.$bottom a very good piece of work i assure you and a merry.now good peter quince call forth your actors by the scroll.masters spread yourselves.$quince answer as i call you.nick bottom the weaver$bottom ready. name what part i am for and proceed.$quince you nick bottom are set down for pyramus.$original text$bottom what is pyramus a lover or a tyrant medieval and renaissance plays often featured tyrant characterskings who gave long ranting speeches. tyrant$quince a lover that kills himself most gallant for love.$bottom that will ask some tears in the true performing of it. if i do it let the audience look to their eyes. i will move storms. i will condole in some measure.to the rest.yet my chief humor is for a tyrant. i could play ercles rarely or a part to tear a cat in to make all split. the raging rocks and shivering shocks shall break the locks of prison gates. and phoebus' car shall shine from far and make and mar the foolish fates. this was loftynow name the rest of the players.this is ercles' vein a tyrants vein. a lover is more condoling.$quince francis flute the bellowsmender$flute here peter quince.$quince flute you must take thisbe on you.$original text$flute what is thisbe a wandering knight$quince it is the lady that pyramus must love.$flute nay faith let me not play a woman. i have a beard coming.$quince thats all one. you shall play it in a mask and you may speak as small as you will.$bottom an i may hide my face let me play thisbe too ill speak in a monstrous little voice thisne thisneah pyramus my lover dear thy thisbe dear and lady dear$quince no no. you must play pyramus.and flute you thisbe.$bottom well proceed.$quince robin starveling the tailor$starveling here peter quince.$quince robin starveling you must play thisbes mother.tom snout the tinker$snout here peter quince.$quince you pyramus' father.myself thisbes father.snug the joiner you the lions part.and i hope here is a play fitted.$original text$snug have you the lions part written pray you if it be give it me for i am slow of study.$quince you may do it extempore for it is nothing but roaring.$bottom let me play the lion too. i will roar that i will do any mans heart good to hear me. i will roar that i will make the duke say let him roar again. let him roar again.$quince an you should do it too terribly you would fright the duchess and the ladies that they would shriek. and that were enough to hang us all.$all that would hang us every mothers son.$bottom i grant you friends if you should fright the ladies out of their wits they would have no more discretion but to hang us. but i will aggravate my voice so that i will roar you as gently as any sucking dove. i will roar you an twere any nightingale.$quince you can play no part but pyramus. for pyramus is a sweetfaced man a proper man as one shall see in a summers day a most lovely gentlemanlike man. therefore you must needs play pyramus.$bottom well i will undertake it. what beard were i best to play it in$quince why what you will.$original text$bottom i will discharge it in either your strawcolor beard your orangetawny beard your purpleingrain beard or your french crowncolor beard your perfect yellow.$quince some of your french crowns have no hair at all and then you will play barefaced.but masters here are your parts. and i am to entreat you request you and desire you to con them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace wood a mile without the town by moonlight. there will we rehearse for if we meet in the city we shall be dogged with company and our devices known. in the meantime i will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants. i pray you fail me not.$bottom we will meet and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. take pains. be perfect. adieu.$quince at the dukes oak we meet.$bottom enough. hold or cut bowstrings.$exeunt$original text$enter a fairy at one side and robin robin goodfellow at another$robin how now spirit whither wander you$fairy over hill over dale thorough bush thorough brier over park over pale thorough flood thorough fire. i do wander everywhere swifter than the moons sphere. and i serve the fairy queen to dew her orbs upon the green. the cowslips tall her pensioners be. in their gold coats spots you see. those be rubies fairy favors. in those freckles live their savors. i must go seek some dewdrops here and hang a pearl in every cowslips ear. farewell thou lob of spirits. ill be gone. our queen and all our elves come here anon.$robin the king doth keep his revels here tonight. take heed the queen come not within his sight. for oberon is passing fell and wrath because that she as her attendant hath a lovely boy stolen from an indian king. she never had so sweet a changeling. and jealous oberon would have the child knight of his train to trace the forests wild. but she perforce withholds the loved boy crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy.$original text$and now they never meet in grove or green by fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen. but they do square that all their elves for fear creep into acorn cups and hide them there.$fairy either i mistake your shape and making quite or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite called robin goodfellow. are not you he that frights the maidens of the villagery skim milk and sometimes labor in the quern and bootless make the breathless housewife churn and sometime make the drink to bear no barm mislead nightwanderers laughing at their harm those that hobgoblin call you and sweet puck you do their work and they shall have good luck. are not you he$robin thou speakst aright. i am that merry wanderer of the night. i jest to oberon and make him smile when i a fat and beanfed horse beguile neighing in likeness of a filly foal. and sometime lurk i in a gossips bowl in very likeness of a roasted crab and when she drinks against her lips i bob and on her withered dewlap pour the ale. the wisest aunt telling the saddest tale sometime for threefoot stool mistaketh me. then slip i from her bum down topples she and tailor cries and falls into a cough and then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh and waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear a merrier hour was never wasted there. but room fairy here comes oberon.$fairy and here my mistress. would that he were gone$original text$enter oberon the king of fairies at one side with his train and titania the queen at the other with hers$oberon ill met by moonlight proud titania.$titania what jealous oberonfairies skip hence. i have forsworn his bed and company.$oberon tarry rash wanton. am not i thy lord$titania then i must be thy lady. but i know when thou hast stolen away from fairyland and in the shape of corin sat all day playing on pipes of corn and versing love to amorous phillida. why art thou here come from the farthest step of india but that forsooth the bouncing amazon your buskined mistress and your warrior love to theseus must be wedded and you come to give their bed joy and prosperity.$oberon how canst thou thus for shame titania knowing i know thy love to theseus glance at my credit with hippolyta didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night from perigouna whom he ravished and make him with fair gles break his faith with ariadne and antiopa$original text$titania these are the forgeries of jealousy. and never since the middle summers spring met we on hill in dale forest or mead by paved fountain or by rushy brook or in the beached margent of the sea to dance our ringlets to the whistling wind but with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. therefore the winds piping to us in vain as in revenge have sucked up from the sea contagious fogs which falling in the land have every pelting river made so proud that they have overborne their continents. the ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain the ploughman lost his sweat and the green corn hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard. the fold stands empty in the drowned field and crows are fatted with the murrain flock. the ninemensmorris is filled up with mud and the quaint mazes in the wanton green for lack of tread are undistinguishable. the human mortals want their winter here. no night is now with hymn or carol blessed. therefore the moon the governess of floods pale in her anger washes all the air that rheumatic diseases do abound. and thorough this distemperature we see the seasons alter hoaryheaded frosts fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose and on old hiems' thin and icy crown an odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds is as in mockery set. the spring the summer the childing autumn angry winter change their wonted liveries and the mazed world by their increase now knows not which is which. and this same progeny of evils comes from our debate from our dissension. we are their parents and original.$original text$oberon do you amend it then. it lies in you. why should titania cross her oberon i do but beg a little changeling boy to be my henchman.$titania set your heart at rest. the fairyland buys not the child of me. his mother was a votaress of my order and in the spiced indian air by night full often hath she gossiped by my side and sat with me on neptunes yellow sands marking th' embarked traders on the flood when we have laughed to see the sails conceive and grow bigbellied with the wanton wind which she with pretty and with swimming gait followingher womb then rich with my young squire would imitate and sail upon the land to fetch me trifles and return again as from a voyage rich with merchandise. but she being mortal of that boy did die. and for her sake do i rear up her boy and for her sake i will not part with him.$oberon how long within this wood intend you stay$titania perchance till after theseus' wedding day. if you will patiently dance in our round and see our moonlight revels go with us. if not shun me and i will spare your haunts.$oberon give me that boy and i will go with thee.$titania not for thy fairy kingdom.fairies away we shall chide downright if i longer stay.$exeunt titania and her train$original text$oberon well go thy way. thou shalt not from this grove till i torment thee for this injury.to robin goodfellow my gentle puck come hither. thou rememberest since once i sat upon a promontory and heard a mermaid on a dolphins back uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath that the rude sea grew civil at her song and certain stars shot madly from their spheres to hear the seamaids music$robin i remember.$oberon that very time i saw but thou couldst not flying between the cold moon and the earth cupid all armed. a certain aim he took at a fair vestal throned by the west and loosed his love shaft smartly from his bow as it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts. but i might see young cupids fiery shaft quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon and the imperial votaress passed on in maiden meditation fancyfree. yet marked i where the bolt of cupid fell. it fell upon a little western flower before milkwhite now purple with loves wound. and maidens call it loveinidleness. fetch me that flower. the herb i showed thee once. the juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid will make or man or woman madly dote upon the next live creature that it sees. fetch me this herb and be thou here again ere the leviathan can swim a league.$robin ill put a girdle round about the earth in forty minutes.$original text$exit robin$oberon having once this juice ill watch titania when she is asleep and drop the liquor of it in her eyes. the next thing then she waking looks upon be it on lion bear or wolf or bull on meddling monkey or on busy ape she shall pursue it with the soul of love. and ere i take this charm from of her sight as i can take it with another herb ill make her render up her page to me. but who comes here i am invisible. and i will overhear their conference.$enter demetrius helena following him$demetrius i love thee not therefore pursue me not. where is lysander and fair hermia the one ill stay the other stayeth me. thou toldst me they were stol'n unto this wood. and here am i and wood within this wood because i cannot meet my hermia. hence get thee gone and follow me no more.$helena you draw me you hardhearted adamant. but yet you draw not iron for my heart is true as steel. leave you your power to draw and i shall have no power to follow you.$demetrius do i entice you do i speak you fair or rather do i not in plainest truth tell you i do not nor i cannot love you$original text$helena and even for that do i love you the more. i am your spaniel. and demetrius the more you beat me i will fawn on you. use me but as your spanielspurn me strike me neglect me lose me. only give me leave unworthy as i am to follow you. what worser place can i beg in your love and yet a place of high respect with me than to be used as you use your dog$demetrius tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit. for i am sick when i do look on thee.$helena and i am sick when i look not on you.$demetrius you do impeach your modesty too much to leave the city and commit yourself into the hands of one that loves you not to trust the opportunity of night and the ill counsel of a desert place with the rich worth of your virginity.$helena your virtue is my privilege. for that it is not night when i do see your face. therefore i think i am not in the night. nor doth this wood lack worlds of company for you in my respect are all the world. then how can it be said i am alone when all the world is here to look on me$demetrius ill run from thee and hide me in the brakes and leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.$helena the wildest hath not such a heart as you. run when you will the story shall be changed.$original text$apollo flies and daphne holds the chase. the dove pursues the griffin. the mild hind makes speed to catch the tigerbootless speed when cowardice pursues and valor flies.$demetrius i will not stay thy questions. let me go. or if thou follow me do not believe but i shall do thee mischief in the wood.$helena ay in the temple in the town the field you do me mischief. fie demetrius your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex. we cannot fight for love as men may do. we should be wooed and were not made to woo.$exit demetrius$ill follow thee and make a heaven of hell to die upon the hand i love so well.$exit helena$oberon fare thee well nymph. ere he do leave this grove thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.$enter robin$hast thou the flower there welcome wanderer.$robin ay there it is.$oberon i pray thee give it me. takes flower from robin i know a bank where the wild thyme blows where oxlips and the nodding violet grows quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine with sweet musk roses and with eglantine.$original text$there sleeps titania sometime of the night lulled in these flowers with dances and delight. and there the snake throws her enameled skin weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. and with the juice of this ill streak her eyes and make her full of hateful fantasies.  gives robin some of the flower take thou some of it and seek through this grove a sweet athenian lady is in love with a disdainful youth. anoint his eyes. but do it when the next thing he espies may be the lady. thou shalt know the man by the athenian garments he hath on. effect it with some care that he may prove more fond on her than she upon her love. and look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.$robin fear not my lord. your servant shall do so.$exeunt severally$original text$enter titania queen of fairies with her train of fairies$titania come now a roundel and a fairy song. then for the third part of a minute hence some to kill cankers in the muskrose buds some war with reremice for their leathern wings to make my small elves coats and some keep back the clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders at our quaint spirits. sing me now asleep. then to your offices and let me rest.$fairies sing$first fairy sings you spotted snakes with double tongue thorny hedgehogs be not seen. newts and blindworms do no wrong. come not near our fairy queen.$fairies  sing philomel with melody sing in our sweet lullaby. lulla lulla lullaby lulla lulla lullaby. never harm nor spell nor charm come our lovely lady nigh. so good night with lullaby.$first fairy sings weaving spiders come not here. hence you longlegged spinners hence$original text$beetles black approach not near. worm nor snail do no offense.$fairies sing philomel with melody sing in our sweet lullaby. lulla lulla lullaby lulla lulla lullaby. never harm nor spell nor charm come our lovely lady nigh. so good night with lullaby.$titania sleeps$second fairy hence away now all is well. one aloof stand sentinel.$exeunt fairies$enter oberon$oberon  squeezing flower juice on titania s eyelids what thou seest when thou dost wake do it for thy true love take. love and languish for his sake. be it ounce or cat or bear pard or boar with bristled hair in thy eye that shall appear when thou wakest it is thy dear. wake when some vile thing is near.$exit oberon$enter lysander and hermia$lysander fair love you faint with wandering in the wood. and to speak troth i have forgot our way.$original text$well rest us hermia if you think it good. and tarry for the comfort of the day.$hermia be it so lysander. find you out a bed for i upon this bank will rest my head.$lysander one turf shall serve as pillow for us both. one heart one bed two bosoms and one troth.$hermia nay good lysander. for my sake my dear lie further off yet. do not lie so near.$lysander o take the sense sweet of my innocence. love takes the meaning in loves conference. i mean that my heart unto yours is knit so that but one heart we can make of it. two bosoms interchained with an oath so then two bosoms and a single troth. then by your side no bed room me deny. for lying so hermia i do not lie.$hermia lysander riddles very prettily. now much beshrew my manners and my pride if hermia meant to say lysander lied. but gentle friend for love and courtesy lie further off in human modesty. such separation as may well be said becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. so far be distant. and good night sweet friend. thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end$lysander amen amen to that fair prayer say i. and then end life when i end loyalty here is my bed. sleep give thee all his rest$original text$hermia with half that wish the wishers eyes be pressed$hermia and lysander sleep$enter robin$robin through the forest have i gone. but athenian found i none on whose eyes i might approve this flowers force in stirring love.  sees lysander and hermia night and silence who is here weeds of athens he doth wear. this is he my master said despised the athenian maid. and here the maiden sleeping sound on the dank and dirty ground. pretty soul she durst not lie near this lacklove this killcourtesy. squeezes flower juice on lysanders eyelids churl upon thy eyes i throw all the power this charm doth owe. when thou wakest let love forbid sleep his seat on thy eyelid. so awake when i am gone for i must now to oberon.$exit robin$enter demetrius and helena running$helena stay though thou kill me sweet demetrius.$demetrius i charge thee hence and do not haunt me thus.$helena o wilt thou darkling leave me do not so.$original text$demetrius stay on thy peril. i alone will go.$exit demetrius$helena oh i am out of breath in this fond chase. the more my prayer the lesser is my grace. happy is hermia wheresoe'er she lies for she hath blessed and attractive eyes. how came her eyes so bright not with salt tears. if so my eyes are oftener washed than hers. no no i am as ugly as a bear for beasts that meet me run away for fear. therefore no marvel though demetrius do as a monster fly my presence thus. what wicked and dissembling glass of mine made me compare with hermias sphery eyne sees lysanderbut who is here lysander on the ground dead or asleep i see no blood no wound. lysander if you live good sir awake.$lysander waking and run through fire i will for thy sweet sake. transparent helena nature shows art that through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. where is demetrius oh how fit a word is that vile name to perish on my sword$helena do not say so lysander. say not so. what though he love your hermia lord what though yet hermia still loves you. then be content.$lysander content with hermia no. i do repent the tedious minutes i with her have spent. not hermia but helena i love. who will not change a raven for a dove the will of man is by his reason swayed and reason says you are the worthier maid.$original text$things growing are not ripe until their season. so i being young till now ripe not to reason. and touching now the point of human skill reason becomes the marshal to my will and leads me to your eyes where i o'erlook loves stories written in loves richest book.$helena wherefore was i to this keen mockery born when at your hands did i deserve this scorn is t not enough is t not enough young man that i did never no nor never can deserve a sweet look from demetrius' eye but you must flout my insufficiency good troth you do me wrong good sooth you do in such disdainful manner me to woo. but fare you well. perforce i must confess i thought you lord of more true gentleness. oh that a lady of one man refused should of another therefore be abused$exit helena$lysander she sees not hermia.hermia sleep thou there. and never mayst thou come lysander near for as a surfeit of the sweetest things the deepest loathing to the stomach brings or as the heresies that men do leave are hated most of those they did deceive so thou my surfeit and my heresy of all be hated but the most of me. and all my powers address your love and might to honor helen and to be her knight.$exit lysander$original text$hermia waking help me lysander help me do thy best to pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. ay me for pity what a dream was here. lysander look how i do quake with fear. methought a serpent eat my heart away and you sat smiling at his cruel pray. lysanderwhat removedlysander lord what out of hearing gone no sound no word alack where are you speak an if you hear. speak of all loves i swoon almost with fear. no then i well perceive you all not nigh. either death or you ill find immediately.$exit$original text$titania sleeps. enter the clowns bottom quince flute snug snout and starveling$bottom are we all met$quince pat pat. and heres a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. this green plot shall be our stage this hawthornbrake our tiringhouse and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.$bottom peter quince$quince what sayest thou bully bottom$bottom there are things in this comedy of pyramus and thisbe that will never please. first pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself which the ladies cannot abide. how answer you that$snout by 'r lakin a parlous fear.$starveling i believe we must leave the killing out when all is done.$bottom not a whit. i have a device to make all well. write me a prologue and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords and that pyramus is not killed indeed. and for the more better assurance tell them that i pyramus am not pyramus but bottom the weaver. this will put them out of fear.$original text$quince well. we will have such a prologue and it shall be written in eight and six.$bottom no make it two more. let it be written in eight and eight.$snout will not the ladies be afeard of the lion$starveling i fear it i promise you.$bottom masters you ought to consider with yourselves. to bring ingod shield usa lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. for there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living. and we ought to look to t.$snout therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.$bottom nay you must name his name and half his face must be seen through the lions neck. and he himself must speak through saying thusor to the same defectladies or fair ladies i would wish you or i would request you or i would entreat you not to fear not to tremble my life for yours. if you think i come hither as a lion it were pity of my life. no i am no such thing. i am a man as other men are. and there indeed let him name his name and tell them plainly he is snug the joiner.$quince well it shall be so. but there is two hard things that is to bring the moonlight into a chamber. for you know pyramus and thisbe meet by moonlight.$original text$snout doth the moon shine that night we play our play$bottom a calendar a calendar look in the almanac. find out moonshine find out moonshine$quince takes out a book yes it doth shine that night.$bottom why then may you leave a casement of the great chamber window where we play open and the moon may shine in at the casement.$quince ay. or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern and say he comes to disfigure or to present the person of moonshine. then there is another thing we must have a wall in the great chamber. for pyramus and thisbe says the story did talk through the chink of a wall.$snout you can never bring in a wall. what say you bottom$bottom some man or other must present wall. and let him have some plaster or some loam or some roughcast about him to signify wall. and let him hold his fingers thus and through that cranny shall pyramus and thisbe whisper.$quince if that may be then all is well. come sit down every mothers son and rehearse your parts.pyramus you begin. when you have spoken your speech enter into that brake.and so everyone according to his cue.$original text$enter robin unseen$robin  aside what hempen homespuns have we swaggering here so near the cradle of the fairy queen what a play toward ill be an auditor. an actor too perhaps if i see cause.$quince speak pyramus.thisbe stand forth.$bottom  as pyramus thisbe the flowers of odious savors sweet$quince odors odors.$bottom as pyramus odors savors sweet so hath thy breath my dearest thisbe dear. and by and by i will to thee appear. but hark a voice stay thou but here awhile$exit bottom$robin aside a stranger pyramus than e'er played here.$exit robin$flute must i speak now$quince ay marry must you. for you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard and is to come again.$flute as thisbe  most radiant pyramus most lilywhite of hue of color like the red rose on triumphant brier most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely jew as true as truest horse that yet would never tire. ill meet thee pyramus at ninnys tomb.$original text$quince ninus' tomb man. why you must not speak that yet. that you answer to pyramus. you speak all your part at once cues and all.pyramus enter. your cue is past. it is never tire.$flute oh. as thisbe as true as truest horse that yet would never tire.$enter bottom with an asss head and robin$bottom as pyramus if i were fair thisbe i were only thine.$quince oh monstrous oh strange we are haunted. pray masters fly masters help$exeunt quince flute snug snout and starveling$robin ill follow you. ill lead you about a round through bog through bush through brake through brier. sometime a horse ill be sometime a hound a hog a headless bear sometime a fire. and neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn like horse hound hog bear fire at every turn.$exit robin$bottom why do they run away this is a knavery of them to make me afeard.$enter snout$original text$snout o bottom thou art changed what do i see on thee$bottom what do you see you see an ass head of your own do you$exit snout$enter quince$quince bless thee bottom bless thee. thou art translated.$exit quince$bottom i see their knavery this is to make an ass of me to fright me if they could. but i will not stir from this place do what they can. i will walk up and down here and i will sing that they shall hear i am not afraid. sings the ouzel cock so black of hue with orangetawny bill the throstle with his note so true the wren with little quill$titania  waking what angel wakes me from my flowery bed$bottom sings the finch the sparrow and the lark the plainsong cuckoo gray whose note full many a man doth mark and dares not answer nay$original text$for indeed who would set his wit to so foolish a bird who would give a bird the lie though he cry cuckoo never so$titania i pray thee gentle mortal sing again. mine ear is much enamored of thy note. so is mine eye enthralled to thy shape. and thy fair virtues force perforce doth move me on the first view to say to swear i love thee.$bottom methinks mistress you should have little reason for that. and yet to say the truth reason and love keep little company together nowadays. the more the pity that some honest neighbors will not make them friends. nay i can gleek upon occasion.$titania thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.$bottom not so neither. but if i had wit enough to get out of this wood i have enough to serve mine own turn.$titania out of this wood do not desire to go. thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no. i am a spirit of no common rate. the summer still doth tend upon my state. and i do love thee. therefore go with me. ill give thee fairies to attend on thee. and they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep and sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep. and i will purge thy mortal grossness so that thou shalt like an airy spirit go. peaseblossom cobweb moth and mustardseed$original text$enter four fairies peaseblossom cobweb moth and mustardseed$peaseblossom ready.$cobweb and i.$moth and i.$mustardseed and i.$all where shall we go$titania be kind and courteous to this gentleman. hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes. feed him with apricoks and dewberries with purple grapes green figs and mulberries. the honey bags steal from the humblebees and for night tapers crop their waxen thighs and light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes to have my love to bed and to arise. and pluck the wings from painted butterflies to fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes. nod to him elves and do him courtesies.$peaseblossom hail mortal.$cobweb hail.$moth hail.$mustardseed hail.$bottom i cry your worships' mercy heartily.i beseech your worships name.$original text$cobweb cobweb.$bottom i shall desire you of more acquaintance good master cobweb. if i cut my finger i shall make bold with you. your name honest gentleman$peaseblossom peaseblossom.$bottom i pray you commend me to mistress squash your mother and to master peascod your father. good master peaseblossom i shall desire you of more acquaintance too. your name i beseech you sir$mustardseed mustardseed.$bottom good master mustardseed i know your patience well. that same cowardly giantlike oxbeef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. i promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. i desire you of more acquaintance good master mustardseed.$titania come wait upon him. lead him to my bower. the moon methinks looks with a watery eye. and when she weeps weeps every little flower lamenting some enforced chastity. tie up my loves tongue. bring him silently.$exeunt$original text$enter oberon king of fairies solus$oberon i wonder if titania be awaked. then what it was that next came in her eye which she must dote on in extremity.$enter robin$here comes my messenger.how now mad spirit what nightrule now about this haunted grove$robin my mistress with a monster is in love. near to her close and consecrated bower while she was in her dull and sleeping hour a crew of patches rude mechanicals that work for bread upon athenian stalls were met together to rehearse a play intended for great theseus' nuptial day. the shallowest thickskin of that barren sort who pyramus presented in their sport forsook his scene and entered in a brake when i did him at this advantage take an asss nole i fixed on his head. anon his thisbe must be answered and forth my mimic comes. when they him spy as wild geese that the creeping fowler eye or russetpated choughs many in sort rising and cawing at the guns report sever themselves and madly sweep the sky so at his sight away his fellows fly and at our stamp here o'er and o'er one falls.$original text$he murder cries and help from athens calls. their sense thus weak lost with their fears thus strong made senseless things begin to do them wrong. for briers and thorns at their apparel snatch some sleeves some hatsfrom yielders all things catch. i led them on in this distracted fear and left sweet pyramus translated there. when in that moment so it came to pass titania waked and straightway loved an ass.$oberon this falls out better than i could devise. but hast thou yet latched the athenians eyes with the love juice as i did bid thee do$robin i took him sleepingthat is finished too and the athenian woman by his side that when he waked of force she must be eyed.$enter demetrius and hermia$oberon aside to robin stand close. this is the same athenian.$robin aside to oberon this is the woman but not this the man.$demetrius oh why rebuke you him that loves you so lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.$hermia now i but chide but i should use thee worse. for thou i fear hast given me cause to curse. if thou hast slain lysander in his sleep being o'er shoes in blood plunge in the deep and kill me too.$original text$the sun was not so true unto the day as he to me. would he have stolen away from sleeping hermia ill believe as soon this whole earth may be bored and that the moon may through the center creep and so displease her brothers noontide with th' antipodes. it cannot be but thou hast murdered him. so should a murderer look so dead so grim.$demetrius so should the murdered look and so should i pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty. yet you the murderer look as bright as clear as yonder venus in her glimmering sphere.$hermia whats this to my lysander where is he ah good demetrius wilt thou give him me$demetrius i had rather give his carcass to my hounds.$hermia out dog out cur thou drivest me past the bounds of maidens patience. hast thou slain him then henceforth be never numbered among men oh once tell true tell true even for my sake durst thou have looked upon him being awake and hast thou killed him sleeping o brave touch could not a worm an adder do so much an adder did it for with doubler tongue than thine thou serpent never adder stung.$demetrius you spend your passion on a misprised mood. i am not guilty of lysanders blood. nor is he dead for aught that i can tell.$hermia i pray thee tell me then that he is well.$demetrius an if i could what should i get therefore$original text$hermia a privilege never to see me more. and from thy hated presence part i so. see me no more whether he be dead or no.$exit hermia$demetrius there is no following her in this fierce vein. here therefore for a while i will remain. so sorrows heaviness doth heavier grow for debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe which now in some slight measure it will pay if for his tender here i make some stay. lies down and sleeps$oberon to robin what hast thou done thou hast mistaken quite and laid the love juice on some true loves sight. of thy misprision must perforce ensue some true love turned and not a false turned true.$robin then fate o'errules that one man holding troth a million fail confounding oath on oath.$oberon about the wood go swifter than the wind and helena of athens look thou find all fancysick she is and pale of cheer with sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear. by some illusion see thou bring her here. ill charm his eyes against she do appear.$robin i go i go. look how i go swifter than arrow from the tartars bow.$exit robin$original text$oberon squeezing flower juice into demetrius s eyes flower of this purple dye hit with cupids archery sink in apple of his eye. when his love he doth espy let her shine as gloriously as the venus of the sky. when thou wakest if she be by beg of her for remedy.$enter robin$robin captain of our fairy band helena is here at hand and the youth mistook by me pleading for a lovers fee. shall we their fond pageant see lord what fools these mortals be$oberon stand aside. the noise they make will cause demetrius to awake.$robin then will two at once woo one. that must needs be sport alone. and those things do best please me that befall preposterously.$enter lysander and helena$lysander why should you think that i should woo in scorn scorn and derision never come in tears.$original text$look when i vow i weep. and vows so born in their nativity all truth appears. how can these things in me seem scorn to you bearing the badge of faith to prove them true$helena you do advance your cunning more and more. when truth kills truth o devilish holy fray these vows are hermias. will you give her o'er weigh oath with oath and you will nothing weigh. your vows to her and me put in two scales will even weigh and both as light as tales.$lysander i had no judgment when to her i swore.$helena nor none in my mind now you give her o'er.$lysander demetrius loves her and he loves not you.$demetrius waking o helena goddess nymph perfect divine to what my love shall i compare thine eyne crystal is muddy. oh how ripe in show thy lips those kissing cherries tempting grow that pure congealed white high taurus' snow fanned with the eastern wind turns to a crow when thou holdst up thy hand. oh let me kiss this princess of pure white this seal of bliss$helena o spite o hell i see you all are bent to set against me for your merriment. if you were civil and knew courtesy you would not do me thus much injury. can you not hate me as i know you do but you must join in souls to mock me too if you were men as men you are in show you would not use a gentle lady so$original text$to vow and swear and superpraise my parts when i am sure you hate me with your hearts. you both are rivals and love hermia and now both rivals to mock helena a trim exploit a manly enterprise to conjure tears up in a poor maids eyes with your derision none of noble sort would so offend a virgin and extort a poor souls patience all to make you sport.$lysander you are unkind demetrius. be not so. for you love hermia. this you know i know. and here with all good will with all my heart in hermias love i yield you up my part. and yours of helena to me bequeath whom i do love and will do till my death.$helena never did mockers waste more idle breath.$demetrius lysander keep thy hermia. i will none. if e'er i loved her all that love is gone. my heart to her but as guestwise sojourned and now to helen is it home returned there to remain.$lysander helen it is not so.$demetrius disparage not the faith thou dost not know lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. look where thy love comes. yonder is thy dear.$enter hermia$hermia dark night that from the eye his function takes the ear more quick of apprehension makes. wherein it doth impair the seeing sense it pays the hearing double recompense.$original text$thou art not by mine eye lysander found. mine ear i thank it brought me to thy sound but why unkindly didst thou leave me so$lysander why should he stay whom love doth press to go$hermia what love could press lysander from my side$lysander lysanders love that would not let him bide fair helena who more engilds the night than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. why seekst thou me could not this make thee know the hate i bear thee made me leave thee so$hermia you speak not as you think. it cannot be.$helena lo she is one of this confederacy now i perceive they have conjoined all three to fashion this false sport in spite of me. injurious hermia most ungrateful maid have you conspired have you with these contrived to bait me with this foul derision is all the counsel that we two have shared the sisters' vows the hours that we have spent when we have chid the hastyfooted time for parting usoh is it all forgot all schooldays' friendship childhood innocence we hermia like two artificial gods have with our needles created both one flower both on one sampler sitting on one cushion both warbling of one song both in one key as if our hands our sides voices and minds had been incorporate. so we grew together like to a double cherryseeming parted but yet an union in partition two lovely berries molded on one stem$original text$so with two seeming bodies but one heart two of the first like coats in heraldry due but to one and crowned with one crest. and will you rent our ancient love asunder to join with men in scorning your poor friend it is not friendly tis not maidenly. our sex as well as i may chide you for it though i alone do feel the injury.$hermia i am amazed at your passionate words. i scorn you not. it seems that you scorn me.$helena have you not set lysander as in scorn to follow me and praise my eyes and face and made your other love demetrius who even but now did spurn me with his foot to call me goddess nymph divine and rare precious celestial wherefore speaks he this to her he hates and wherefore doth lysander deny your love so rich within his soul and tender me forsooth affection but by your setting on by your consent what though i be not so in grace as you so hung upon with love so fortunate but miserable most to love unloved this you should pity rather than despise.$hermia i understand not what you mean by this.$helena ay do. persever counterfeit sad looks make mouths upon me when i turn my back wink each at other hold the sweet jest up this sport well carried shall be chronicled.$original text$if you have any pity grace or manners you would not make me such an argument. but fare ye well. 'tis partly my own fault which death or absence soon shall remedy.$lysander stay gentle helena. hear my excuse. my love my life my soul fair helena$helena oh excellent$hermia to lysander sweet do not scorn her so.$demetrius if she cannot entreat i can compel.$lysander thou canst compel no more than she entreat. thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers. helen i love thee. by my life i do. i swear by that which i will lose for thee to prove him false that says i love thee not.$demetrius i say i love thee more than he can do.$lysander if thou say so withdraw and prove it too.$demetrius quick come.$hermia lysander whereto tends all this$holds lysander back$lysander to hermiaaway you ethiope$demetrius to hermia no no. hell seem to break loose.$original text$to lysander take on as you would follow but yet come not. you are a tame man go$lysander to hermia hang off thou cat thou burr vile thing let loose or i will shake thee from me like a serpent.$hermia why are you grown so rude what change is this sweet love$lysander thy love out tawny tartar out out loathed medicine o hated potion hence$hermia do you not jest$helena yes sooth and so do you.$lysander demetrius i will keep my word with thee.$demetrius i would i had your bond for i perceive a weak bond holds you. ill not trust your word.$lysander what should i hurt her strike her kill her dead although i hate her ill not harm her so.$hermia to lysander what can you do me greater harm than hate hate me wherefore o me what news my love am not i hermia are not you lysander i am as fair now as i was erewhile. since night you loved me. yet since night you left me. why then you left meoh the gods forbid in earnest shall i say$lysander ay by my life and never did desire to see thee more. therefore be out of hope of question of doubt.$original text$be certain nothing truer. 'tis no jest that i do hate thee and love helena.$hermia o me  to helena you juggler you cankerblossom you thief of love what have you come by night and stol'n my loves heart from him$helena fine i' faith have you no modesty no maiden shame no touch of bashfulness what will you tear impatient answers from my gentle tongue fie fie you counterfeit you puppet you$hermia puppet why soay that way goes the game. now i perceive that she hath made compare between our statures. she hath urged her height and with her personage her tall personage her height forsooth she hath prevailed with him. and are you grown so high in his esteem because i am so dwarfish and so low how low am i thou painted maypole speak. how low am i i am not yet so low but that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.$helena to lysander and demetrius i pray you though you mock me gentlemen let her not hurt me. i was never cursed. i have no gift at all in shrewishness. i am a right maid for my cowardice. let her not strike me. you perhaps may think because she is something lower than myself that i can match her.$original text$hermia lower hark again$helena good hermia do not be so bitter with me. i evermore did love you hermia did ever keep your counsels never wronged you save that in love unto demetrius i told him of your stealth unto this wood. he followed you. for love i followed him. but he hath chid me hence and threatened me to strike me spurn menay to kill me too. and now so you will let me quiet go to athens will i bear my folly back and follow you no further. let me go. you see how simple and how fond i am.$hermia why get you gone who is t that hinders you$helena a foolish heart that i leave here behind.$hermia what with lysander$helena with demetrius.$lysander be not afraid. she shall not harm thee helena.$demetrius to lysander no sir she shall not though you take her part.$helena oh when shes angry she is keen and shrewd she was a vixen when she went to school. and though she be but little she is fierce.$hermia little again nothing but low and little why will you suffer her to flout me thus let me come to her.$original text$lysander to hermiaget you gone you dwarf you minimus of hindering knotgrass made you bead you acorn$demetrius you are too officious in her behalf that scorns your services. let her alone. speak not of helena. take not her part. for if thou dost intend never so little show of love to her thou shalt aby it.$lysander now she holds me not. now follow if thou darest to try whose right of thine or mine is most in helena.$demetrius follow nay ill go with thee cheek by jowl.$exeunt lysander and demetrius$hermia you mistress all this coil is long of you. nay go not back.$helena i will not trust you i nor longer stay in your curst company. your hands than mine are quicker for a fray. my legs are longer though to run away.$exit helena$hermia i am amazed and know not what to say.$exit hermia$oberon to robin this is thy negligence. still thou mistakest or else committst thy knaveries willfully.$original text$robin believe me king of shadows i mistook. did not you tell me i should know the man by the athenian garment he had on and so far blameless proves my enterprise that i have 'nointed an athenians eyes. and so far am i glad it so did sort as this their jangling i esteem a sport.$oberon thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight. hie therefore robin overcast the night. the starry welkin cover thou anon with drooping fog as black as acheron and lead these testy rivals so astray as one come not within anothers way. like to lysander sometime frame thy tongue then stir demetrius up with bitter wrong. and sometime rail thou like demetrius. and from each other look thou lead them thus till o'er their brows deathcounterfeiting sleep with leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. gives robin another flower then crush this herb into lysanders eye whose liquor hath this virtuous property to take from thence all error with his might and make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. when they next wake all this derision shall seem a dream and fruitless vision. and back to athens shall the lovers wend with league whose date till death shall never end. whiles i in this affair do thee employ ill to my queen and beg her indian boy. and then i will her charmed eye release from monsters view and all things shall be peace.$original text$robin my fairy lord this must be done with haste. for nights swift dragons cut the clouds full fast and yonder shines auroras harbinger at whose approach ghosts wandering here and there troop home to churchyards. damned spirits all that in crossways and floods have burial already to their wormy beds are gone. for fear lest day should look their shames upon they willfully themselves exile from light and must for aye consort with blackbrowed night.$oberon but we are spirits of another sort. i with the mornings love have oft made sport and like a forester the groves may tread even till the eastern gate all fiery red opening on neptune with fair blessed beams turns into yellow gold his salt green streams. but notwithstanding haste. make no delay. we may effect this business yet ere day.$exit oberon$robin up and down up and down i will lead them up and down. i am feared in field and town. goblin lead them up and down. here comes one.$enter lysander$lysander where art thou proud demetrius speak thou now.$original text$robin  as demetrius here villain. drawn and ready. where art thou$lysander i will be with thee straight.$robin as demetriusfollow me then to plainer ground.$exit lysander$enter demetrius$demetrius lysander speak again thou runaway thou coward art thou fled speak in some bush where dost thou hide thy head$robin as lysander thou coward art thou bragging to the stars telling the bushes that thou lookst for wars and wilt not come come recreant. come thou child ill whip thee with a rod. he is defiled that draws a sword on thee.$demetrius yea art thou there$robin as lysander follow my voice. well try no manhood here.$exeunt$enter lysander$lysander he goes before me and still dares me on. when i come where he calls then he is gone. the villain is much lighterheeled than i. i followed fast but faster he did fly that fallen am i in dark uneven way$original text$and here will rest me.  lies down come thou gentle day for if but once thou show me thy grey light ill find demetrius and revenge this spite. sleeps$enter robin and demetrius$robin as lysander to demetrius ho ho ho coward why comest thou not$demetrius abide me if thou darest for well i wot thou runnst before me shifting every place and darest not stand nor look me in the face. where art thou now$robin  as lysandercome hither. i am here.$demetrius nay then thou mockst me. thou shalt buy this dear if ever i thy face by daylight see. now go thy way. faintness constraineth me to measure out my length on this cold bed. by days approach look to be visited. lies down and sleeps$enter helena$helena o weary night o long and tedious night abate thy hours. shine comforts from the east that i may back to athens by daylight from these that my poor company detest. and sleep that sometimes shuts up sorrows eye steal me awhile from mine own company. lies down and sleeps$original text$robin yet but three come one more. two of both kinds make up four. here she comes cursed and sad. cupid is a knavish lad thus to make poor females mad.$enter hermia$hermia never so weary never so in woe bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers i can no further crawl no further go. my legs can keep no pace with my desires. here will i rest me till the break of day. heavens shield lysander if they mean a fray  lies down and sleeps$robin on the ground sleep sound. ill apply to your eye. gentle lover remedy. squeezes flower juice into lysander s eyes when thou wakest thou takest true delight in the sight of thy former ladys eye. and the country proverb known that every man should take his own in your waking shall be shown. jack shall have jill. nought shall go ill. the man shall have his mare again and all shall be well.$exit robin$original text$lysander demetrius helena and hermia sleep. enter titania queen of the fairies and bottom with the asss head and fairies peaseblossom cobweb moth mustardseed oberon the king behind them unseen$titania to bottom come sit thee down upon this flowery bed while i thy amiable cheeks do coy and stick musk roses in thy sleek smooth head and kiss thy fair large ears my gentle joy.$bottom wheres peaseblossom$peaseblossom ready.$bottom scratch my head peaseblossom. wheres monsieur cobweb$cobweb ready.$bottom monsieur cobweb good monsieur get you your weapons in your hand and kill me a redhipped humblebee on the top of a thistle. and good monsieur bring me the honey bag. do not fret yourself too much in the action monsieur. and good monsieur have a care the honey bag break not. i would be loath to have you overflown with a honey bag signor.$exit cobweb$wheres monsieur mustardseed$mustardseed ready.$original text$bottom give me your neaf monsieur mustardseed. pray you leave your courtesy good monsieur.$mustardseed whats your will$bottom nothing good monsieur but to help cavalery cobweb to scratch. i must to the barbers monsieur for methinks i am marvelous hairy about the face. and i am such a tender ass if my hair do but tickle me i must scratch.$titania what wilt thou hear some music my sweet love$bottom i have a reasonable good ear in music. lets have the tongs and the bones.$titania or say sweet love what thou desirest to eat.$bottom truly a peck of provender. i could munch your good dry oats. methinks i have a great desire to a bottle of hay. good hay sweet hay hath no fellow.$titania i have a venturous fairy that shall seek the squirrels hoard and fetch thee new nuts.$bottom i had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. but i pray you let none of your people stir me. i have an exposition of sleep come upon me.$titania sleep thou and i will wind thee in my arms. fairies be gone and be all ways away.$exeunt fairies$original text$so doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle gently entwist. the female ivy so enrings the barky fingers of the elm. oh how i love thee how i dote on thee$titania and bottom sleep$enter robin$oberon welcome good robin. seest thou this sweet sight her dotage now i do begin to pity. for meeting her of late behind the wood seeking sweet favors from this hateful fool i did upbraid her and fall out with her. for she his hairy temples then had rounded with a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers and that same dew which sometime on the buds was wont to swell like round and orient pearls stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. when i had at my pleasure taunted her and she in mild terms begged my patience i then did ask of her her changeling child which straight she gave me and her fairy sent to bear him to my bower in fairyland. and now i have the boy i will undo this hateful imperfection of her eyes. and gentle puck take this transformed scalp from off the head of this athenian swain that he awaking when the other do may all to athens back again repair and think no more of this nights accidents but as the fierce vexation of a dream. but first i will release the fairy queen.$squeezing flower juice into titanias eyes$original text$be as thou wast wont to be. see as thou wast wont to see. dians bud o'er cupids flower hath such force and blessed power. now my titania wake you my sweet queen.$titania waking my oberon what visions have i seen methought i was enamored of an ass.$oberon there lies your love.$titania how came these things to pass oh how mine eyes do loathe his visage now$oberon silence awhile.robin take off this head. titania music call and strike more dead than common sleep of all these five the sense.$titania music ho music such as charmeth sleep$music$robin taking the asss head off bottom now when thou wakest with thine own fools eyes peep.$oberon sound musiccome my queen take hands with me and rock the ground whereon these sleepers be. dances with titania now thou and i are new in amity and will tomorrow midnight solemnly dance in duke theseus' house triumphantly and bless it to all fair prosperity. there shall the pairs of faithful lovers be wedded with theseus all in jollity.$original text$robin fairy king attend and mark. i do hear the morning lark.$oberon then my queen in silence sad trip we after the nights shade. we the globe can compass soon swifter than the wandering moon.$titania come my lord and in our flight tell me how it came this night that i sleeping here was found with these mortals on the ground.$exeunt oberon titania and robin$wind horn withinenter theseus and all his train egeus and hippolyta$theseus go one of you find out the forester. for now our observation is performed. and since we have the vaward of the day my love shall hear the music of my hounds. uncouple in the western valley. let them go. dispatch i say and find the forester.$exit one of the train$we will fair queen up to the mountains top and mark the musical confusion of hounds and echo in conjunction.$hippolyta i was with hercules and cadmus once when in a wood of crete they bayed the bear with hounds of sparta. never did i hear such gallant chiding. for besides the groves$original text$the skies the fountains every region near seemed all one mutual cry. i never heard so musical a discord such sweet thunder.$theseus my hounds are bred out of the spartan kind so flewed so sanded and their heads are hung with ears that sweep away the morning dew crookkneed and dewlapped like thessalian bulls slow in pursuit but matched in mouth like bells each under each. a cry more tunable was never hollaed to nor cheered with horn in crete in sparta nor in thessaly. judge when you hear. sees the four sleeping lovers but soft what nymphs are these$egeus my lord this is my daughter here asleep. and this lysander. this demetrius is. this helena old nedars helena. i wonder of their being here together.$theseus no doubt they rose up early to observe the rite of may and hearing our intent came here in grace our solemnity. but speak egeus. is not this the day that hermia should give answer of her choice$egeus it is my lord.$theseus go bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.$exit one of the train$wind horns and shout within lysander demetrius helena and hermia wake and start up$good morrow friends. saint valentine is past.$original text$begin these woodbirds but to couple now$lysander demetrius helena and hermia kneel$lysander pardon my lord.$theseus i pray you all stand up.$lysander demetrius helena and hermia stand$to lysander and demetrius i know you two are rival enemies. how comes this gentle concord in the world that hatred is so far from jealousy to sleep by hate and fear no enmity$lysander my lord i shall reply amazedly half sleep half waking. but as yet i swear i cannot truly say how i came here. but as i thinkfor truly would i speak and now do i bethink me so it is i came with hermia hither. our intent was to be gone from athens where we might without the peril of the athenian law$egeus to theseus enough enough my lord. you have enough i beg the law the law upon his head. they would have stol'n away they would demetrius thereby to have defeated you and me you of your wife and me of my consent of my consent that she should be your wife.$demetrius to theseus my lord fair helen told me of their stealth of this their purpose hither to this wood. and i in fury hither followed them fair helena in fancy following me.$original text$but my good lord i wot not by what power but by some power it ismy love to hermia melted as the snow seems to me now as the remembrance of an idle gaud which in my childhood i did dote upon. and all the faith the virtue of my heart the object and the pleasure of mine eye is only helena. to her my lord was i betrothed ere i saw hermia. but like in sickness did i loathe this food. but as in health come to my natural taste now i do wish it love it long for it and will for evermore be true to it.$theseus fair lovers you are fortunately met. of this discourse we more will hear anon. egeus i will overbear your will. for in the temple by and by with us these couples shall eternally be knit. and for the morning now is something worn our purposed hunting shall be set aside. away with us to athens. three and three well hold a feast in great solemnity. come hippolyta.$exeunt theseus hippolyta egeus and train$demetrius these things seem small and undistinguishable like faroff mountains turned into clouds.$hermia when everything seems double. methinks i see these things with parted eye$helena so methinks.$original text$and i have found demetrius like a jewel mine own and not mine own.$demetrius are you sure that we are awake it seems to me that yet we sleep we dream. do not you think the duke was here and bid us follow him$hermia yea and my father.$helena and hippolyta.$lysander and he did bid us follow to the temple.$demetrius why then we are awake. lets follow him and by the way let us recount our dreams.$exeunt lysander demetrius helena and hermia$bottom waking when my cue comes call me and i will answer. my next is most fair pyramus. heighho peter quince flute the bellowsmender snout the tinker starveling gods my life stol'n hence and left me asleep i have had a most rare vision. i have had a dreampast the wit of man to say what dream it was. man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream. methought i wasthere is no man can tell what. methought i was and methought i hadbut man is but a patched fool if he will offer to say what methought i had. the eye of man hath not heard the ear of man hath not seen mans hand is not able to taste his tongue to conceive nor his heart to report what my dream was. i will get peter quince to write a ballad of this dream.$original text$it shall be called bottoms dream because it hath no bottom. and i will sing it in the latter end of a play before the duke. peradventure to make it the more gracious i shall sing it at her death.$exit$original text$enter quince flute snout and starveling$quince have you sent to bottoms house is he come home yet$starveling he cannot be heard of. out of doubt he is transported.$flute if he come not then the play is marred. it goes not forward. doth it$quince it is not possible. you have not a man in all athens able to discharge pyramus but he.$flute no he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in athens.$quince yea and the best person too. and he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.$flute you must say paragon. a paramour is god bless us a thing of naught.$enter snug$snug masters the duke is coming from the temple and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. if our sport had gone forward we had all been made men.$flute o sweet bully bottom thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. he could not have scaped sixpence a day. an the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing pyramus ill be hanged.$original text$he would have deserved it. sixpence a day in pyramus or nothing.$enter bottom$bottom where are these lads where are these hearts$quince bottom o most courageous day o most happy hour$bottom masters i am to discourse wondersbut ask me not what for if i tell you i am no true athenian. i will tell you everything right as it fell out.$quince let us hear sweet bottom.$bottom not a word of me. all that i will tell you is that the duke hath dined. get your apparel together good strings to your beards new ribbons to your pumps. meet presently at the palace. every man look o'er his part. for the short and the long is our play is preferred. in any case let thisbe have clean linen. and let not him that plays the lion pair his nails for they shall hang out for the lions claws. and most dear actors eat no onions nor garlic for we are to utter sweet breath. and i do not doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. no more words. away go away$exeunt$original text$enter theseus hippolyta and philostrate with other attendant lords$hippolyta 'tis strange my theseus that these lovers speak of.$theseus more strange than true. i never may believe these antique fables nor these fairy toys. lovers and madmen have such seething brains such shaping fantasies that apprehend more than cool reason ever comprehends. the lunatic the lover and the poet are of imagination all compact. one sees more devils than vast hell can hold that is the madman. the lover all as frantic sees helens beauty in a brow of egypt. the poets eye in fine frenzy rolling doth glance from heaven to earth from earth to heaven. and as imagination bodies forth the forms of things unknown the poets pen turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing a local habitation and a name. such tricks hath strong imagination that if it would but apprehend some joy it comprehends some bringer of that joy. or in the night imagining some fear how easy is a bush supposed a bear$hippolyta but all the story of the night told over and all their minds transfigured so together more witnesseth than fancys images and grows to something of great constancy but howsoever strange and admirable.$original text$enter richard duke of gloucester solus$richard now is the winter of our discontent made glorious summer by this son of york and all the clouds that loured upon our house in the deep bosom of the ocean buried. now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths our bruised arms hung up for monuments our stern alarums changed to merry meetings our dreadful marches to delightful measures. grimvisaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front and now instead of mounting barbed steeds to fright the souls of fearful adversaries he capers nimbly in a ladys chamber to the lascivious pleasing of a lute. but i that am not shaped for sportive tricks nor made to court an amorous looking glass i that am rudely stamped and want loves majesty to strut before a wanton ambling nymph i that am curtailed of this fair proportion cheated of feature by dissembling nature deformed unfinished sent before my time into this breathing world scarce half made up and that so lamely and unfashionable that dogs bark at me as i halt by them why i in this weak piping time of peace have no delight to pass away the time unless to see my shadow in the sun and descant on mine own deformity.$original text$and therefore since i cannot prove a lover to entertain these fair wellspoken days i am determined to prove a villain and hate the idle pleasures of these days. plots have i laid inductions dangerous by drunken prophecies libels and dreams to set my brother clarence and the king in deadly hate the one against the other and if king edward be as true and just as i am subtle false and treacherous this day should clarence closely be mewed up about a prophecy which says that g of edwards heirs the murderer shall be. dive thoughts down to my soul. here clarence comes.$enter clarence guarded and brakenbury$brother good day. what means this armed guard that waits upon your grace$clarence his majesty tend'ring my persons safety hath appointed this conduct to convey me to the tower.$richard upon what cause$clarence because my name is george.$richard alack my lord that fault is none of yours. he should for that commit your godfathers. o belike his majesty hath some intent that you shall be new christened in the tower. but whats the matter clarence may i know$original text$clarence yea richard when i know for i protest as yet i do not. but as i can learn he hearkens after prophecies and dreams and from the crossrow plucks the letter g and says a wizard told him that by g his issue disinherited should be. and for my name of george begins with g it follows in his thought that i am he. these as i learn and such like toys as these have moved his highness to commit me now.$richard why this it is when men are ruled by women. 'tis not the king that sends you to the tower. my lady grey his wife clarence tis she that tempers him to this extremity. was it not she and that good man of worship anthony woodeville her brother there that made him send lord hastings to the tower from whence this present day he is delivered we are not safe clarence. we are not safe.$clarence by heaven i think there is no man is secure but the queens kindred and nightwalking heralds that trudge betwixt the king and mistress shore. heard ye not what an humble suppliant lord hastings was to her for his delivery$richard humbly complaining to her deity got my lord chamberlain his liberty. ill tell you what i think it is our way if we will keep in favor with the king to be her men and wear her livery. the jealous o'erworn widow and herself since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen are mighty gossips in this monarchy.$original text$brakenbury i beseech your graces both to pardon me. his majesty hath straitly given in charge that no man shall have private conference of what degree soever with his brother.$richard even so. an please your worship brakenbury you may partake of anything we say. we speak no treason man. we say the king is wise and virtuous and his noble queen well struck in years fair and not jealous. we say that shores wife hath a pretty foot a cherry lip a bonny eye a passing pleasing tongue and that the queens kindred are made gentlefolks. how say you sir can you deny all this$brakenbury with this my lord myself have naught to do.$richard naught to do with mistress shore i tell thee fellow he that doth naught with her excepting one were best he do it secretly alone.$brakenbury what one my lord$richard her husband knave. wouldst thou betray me$brakenbury i do beseech your grace to pardon me and withal forbear your conference with the noble duke.$original text$clarence we know thy charge brakenbury and will obey.$richard we are the queens abjects and must obey. brother farewell. i will unto the king and whatsoe'er you will employ me in were it to call king edwards widow sister i will perform it to enfranchise you. meantime this deep disgrace in brotherhood touches me deeper than you can imagine.$clarence i know it pleaseth neither of us well.$richard well your imprisonment shall not be long. i will deliver you or else lie for you. meantime have patience.$clarence i must perforce. farewell.$exeunt clarence brakenbury and guard$richard go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. simple plain clarence i do love thee so that i will shortly send thy soul to heaven if heaven will take the present at our hands. but who comes here the newdelivered hastings$enter hastings$hastings good time of day unto my gracious lord.$richard as much unto my good lord chamberlain. well are you welcome to the open air. how hath your lordship brooked imprisonment$original text$hastings with patience noble lord as prisoners must. but i shall live my lord to give them thanks that were the cause of my imprisonment.$richard no doubt no doubt and so shall clarence too for they that were your enemies are his and have prevailed as much on him as you.$hastings more pity that the eagle should be mewed while kites and buzzards prey at liberty.$richard what news abroad$hastings no news so bad abroad as this at home the king is sickly weak and melancholy and his physicians fear him mightily.$richard now by saint paul that news is bad indeed. o he hath kept an evil diet long and overmuch consumed his royal person. 'tis very grievous to be thought upon. where is he in his bed$hastings he is.$richard go you before and i will follow you.$exit hastings$original text$he cannot live i hope and must not die till george be packed with posthorse up to heaven. ill in to urge his hatred more to clarence with lies well steeled with weighty arguments and if i fail not in my deep intent clarence hath not another day to live which done god take king edward to his mercy and leave the world for me to bustle in. for then ill marry warwicks youngest daughter. what though i killed her husband and her father the readiest way to make the wench amends is to become her husband and her father the which will i not all so much for love as for another secret close intent by marrying her which i must reach unto. but yet i run before my horse to market. clarence still breathes edward still lives and reigns. when they are gone then must i count my gains.$exit$original text$enter the corse of henry the sixth on a bier with halberds to guard it lady anne being the mourner accompanied by gentlemen$anne set down set down your honorable load if honor may be shrouded in a hearse whilst i awhile obsequiously lament th' untimely fall of virtuous lancaster.$they set down the bier$poor keycold figure of a holy king pale ashes of the house of lancaster thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood be it lawful that i invocate thy ghost to hear the lamentations of poor anne wife to thy edward to thy slaughtered son stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds. lo in these windows that let forth thy life i pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. o cursed be the hand that made these holes cursed the heart that had the heart to do it cursed the blood that let this blood from hence. more direful hap betide that hated wretch that makes us wretched by the death of thee than i can wish to wolves to spiders toads or any creeping venomed thing that lives. if ever he have child abortive be it prodigious and untimely brought to light whose ugly and unnatural aspect may fright the hopeful mother at the view and that be heir to his unhappiness.$original text$if ever he have wife let her be made more miserable by the death of him than i am made by my poor lord and thee. come now towards chertsey with your holy load taken from pauls to be interred there.$they take up the bier$and still as you are weary of this weight rest you whiles i lament king henrys corse.$enter richard duke of gloucester$richard stay you that bear the corse and set it down.$anne what black magician conjures up this fiend to stop devoted charitable deeds$richard villains set down the corse or by saint paul ill make a corse of him that disobeys.$gentleman my lord stand back and let the coffin pass.$richard unmannered dog stand thou when i command advance thy halberd higher than my breast or by saint paul ill strike thee to my foot and spurn upon thee beggar for thy boldness.$they set down the bier$original text$anne to gentlemen and halberds what do you tremble are you all afraid alas i blame you not for you are mortal and mortal eyes cannot endure the devil. avaunt thou dreadful minister of hell. thou hadst but power over his mortal body his soul thou canst not have. therefore begone.$richard sweet saint for charity be not so curst.$anne foul devil for gods sake hence and trouble us not for thou hast made the happy earth thy hell filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. if thou delight to view thy heinous deeds behold this pattern of thy butcheries.$she points to the corse$o gentlemen see see dead henrys wounds open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh blush blush thou lump of foul deformity for tis thy presence that exhales this blood from cold and empty veins where no blood dwells. thy deeds inhuman and unnatural provokes this deluge most unnatural. o god which this blood madst revenge his death o earth which this blood drinkst revenge his death either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead or earth gape open wide and eat him quick as thou dost swallow up this good kings blood which his hellgoverned arm hath butchered$original text$richard lady you know no rules of charity which renders good for bad blessings for curses.$anne villain thou knowst not law of god nor man. no beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.$richard but i know none and therefore am no beast.$anne o wonderful when devils tell the truth$richard more wonderful when angels are so angry. vouchsafe divine perfection of a woman of these supposed crimes to give me leave by circumstance but to acquit myself.$anne vouchsafe defused infection of a man of these known evils but to give me leave by circumstance to curse thy cursed self.$richard fairer than tongue can name thee let me have some patient leisure to excuse myself.$anne fouler than heart can think thee thou canst make no excuse current but to hang thyself.$richard by such despair i should accuse myself.$anne and by despairing shalt thou stand excused for doing worthy vengeance on thyself that didst unworthy slaughter upon others.$original text$richard say that i slew them not.$anne then say they were not slain. but dead they are and devilish slave by thee.$richard i did not kill your husband.$anne why then he is alive.$richard nay he is dead and slain by edwards hands.$anne in thy foul throat thou liest. queen margaret saw thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood the which thou once didst bend against her breast but that thy brothers beat aside the point.$richard i was provoked by her sland'rous tongue that laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.$anne thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind that never dreamst on aught but butcheries. didst thou not kill this king$richard i grant you.$anne dost grant me hedgehog then god grant me too thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed. o he was gentle mild and virtuous.$richard the better for the king of heaven that hath him.$anne he is in heaven where thou shalt never come.$richard let him thank me that holp to send him thither for he was fitter for that place than earth.$original text$anne and thou unfit for any place but hell.$richard yes one place else if you will hear me name it.$anne some dungeon.$richard your bedchamber.$anne ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest$richard so will it madam till i lie with you.$anne i hope so.$richard i know so. but gentle lady anne to leave this keen encounter of our wits and fall something into a slower method is not the causer of the timeless deaths of these plantagenets henry and edward as blameful as the executioner$original text$anne thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.$richard your beauty was the cause of that effect your beauty that did haunt me in my sleep to undertake the death of all the world so i might live one hour in your sweet bosom.$anne if i thought that i tell thee homicide these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.$richard these eyes could never endure that beautys wrack. you should not blemish it if i stood by. as all the world is cheered by the sun so i by that. it is my day my life.$anne black night o'ershade thy day and death thy life.$richard curse not thyself fair creature thou art both.$anne i would i were to be revenged on thee.$richard it is a quarrel most unnatural to be revenged on him that loveth thee.$anne it is a quarrel just and reasonable to be revenged on him that killed my husband.$richard he that bereft thee lady of thy husband did it to help thee to a better husband.$anne his better doth not breathe upon the earth.$original text$richard he lives that loves thee better than he could.$anne name him.$richard plantagenet.$anne why that was he.$richard the selfsame name but one of better nature.$anne where is he$richard here.$she spitteth at him$why dost thou spit at me$anne would it were mortal poison for thy sake.$richard never came poison from so sweet a place.$anne never hung poison on a fouler toad. out of my sight thou dost infect mine eyes.$richard thine eyes sweet lady have infected mine.$anne would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.$original text$richard i would they were that i might die at once for now they kill me with a living death. those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears shamed their aspect with store of childish drops. these eyes which never shed remorseful tear no when my father york and edward wept to hear the piteous moan that rutland made when blackfaced clifford shook his sword at him nor when thy warlike father like a child told the sad story of my fathers death and twenty times made pause to sob and weep that all the standersby had wet their cheeks like trees bedashed with rainin that sad time my manly eyes did scorn an humble tear and what these sorrows could not thence exhale thy beauty hath and made them blind with weeping. i never sued to friend nor enemy my tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word. but now thy beauty is proposed my fee my proud heart sues and prompts my tongue to speak.$she looks scornfully at him$teach not thy lip such scorn for it were made for kissing lady not for such contempt. if thy revengeful heart cannot forgive lo here i lend thee this sharppointed sword which if thou please to hide in this true breast and let the soul forth that adoreth thee i lay it naked to the deadly stroke and humbly beg the death upon my knee.$he kneels and lays his breast open she offers at it with his sword$nay do not pause for i did kill king henry but twas thy beauty that provoked me. nay now dispatch twas i that stabbed young edward but twas thy heavenly face that set me on.$original text$she falls the sword$take up the sword again or take up me.$anne arise dissembler. though i wish thy death i will not be the executioner.$richard rising then bid me kill myself and i will do it.$anne i have already.$richard that was in thy rage. speak it again and even with the word this hand which for thy love did kill thy love shall for thy love kill a far truer love. to both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.$anne i would i knew thy heart.$richard 'tis figured in my tongue.$anne i fear me both are false.$richard then never man was man true.$anne well well put up your sword.$richard say then my peace is made.$anne that shall you know hereafter.$original text$richard but shall i live in hope$anne all men i hope live so.$richard vouchsafe to wear this ring.$anne to take is not to give.$he places the ring on her finger$richard look how this ring encompasseth finger even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart. wear both of them for both of them are thine. and if thy poor devoted servant may but beg one favor at thy gracious hand thou dost confirm his happiness forever.$anne what is it$richard that it would please you leave these sad designs to him that hath more cause to be a mourner and presently repair to crosby house where after i have solemnly interred at chertsey monast'ry this noble king and wet his grave with my repentant tears i will with all expedient duty see you. for divers unknown reasons i beseech you grant me this boon.$anne with all my heart and much it joys me too to see you are become so penitent. tressel and berkeley go along with me.$richard bid me farewell.$original text$anne 'tis more than you deserve but since you teach me how to flatter you imagine i have said farewell already.$exeunt lady anne and two others$richard sirs take up the corse.$gentleman towards chertsey noble lord$richard no to whitefriars. there attend my coming.$exeunt all but richard$was ever woman in this humor wooed was ever woman in this humor won ill have her but i will not keep her long. what i that killed her husband and his father to take her in her hearts extremest hate with curses in her mouth tears in her eyes the bleeding witness of my hatred by having god her conscience and these bars against me and i no friends to back my suit at all but the plain devil and dissembling looks and yet to win her all the world to nothing ha hath she forgot already that brave prince edward her lord whom i some three months since stabbed in my angry mood at tewkesbury a sweeter and a lovellier gentleman framed in the prodigality of nature young valiant wise and no doubt right royal the spacious world cannot again afford.$original text$and will she yet abase her eyes on me that cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince and made her widow to a woeful bed on me whose all not equals edwards moiety on me that halts and am misshapen thus my dukedom to a beggarly denier i do mistake my person all this while upon my life she finds although i cannot myself to be a marv'lous proper man. ill be at charges for a looking glass and entertain a score or two of tailors to study fashions to adorn my body. since i am crept in favor with myself i will maintain it with some little cost. but first ill turn yon fellow in his grave and then return lamenting to my love. shine out fair sun till i have bought a glass that i may see my shadow as i pass.$exit$original text$enter queen elizabeth lord marquess of dorset lord rivers and lord grey$rivers have patience madam. theres no doubt his majesty will soon recover his accustomed health.$grey in that you brook it ill it makes him worse. therefore for gods sake entertain good comfort and cheer his grace with quick and merry eyes.$queen elizabeth if he were dead what would betide on me$rivers no other harm but loss of such a lord.$queen elizabeth the loss of such a lord includes all harms.$grey the heavens have blessed you with a goodly son to be your comforter when he is gone.$queen elizabeth ah he is young and his minority is put unto the trust of richard gloucester a man that loves not me nor none of you.$rivers is it concluded that he shall be protector$queen elizabeth it is determined not concluded yet but so it must be if the king miscarry.$original text$enter buckingham and lord stanley earl of derby$grey here comes the lord of buckingham and derby.$buckingham to queen elizabeth good time of day unto your royal grace.$stanley god make your majesty joyful as you have been.$queen elizabeth the countess richmond good my lord of derby to your good prayer will scarcely say amen. yet derby notwithstanding shes your wife and loves not me be you good lord assured i hate not you for her proud arrogance.$stanley i do beseech you either not believe the envious slanders of her false accusers or if she be accused in true report bear with her weakness which i think proceeds from wayward sickness and no grounded malice.$queen elizabeth saw you the king today my lord of derby$stanley but now the duke of buckingham and i are come from visiting his majesty.$queen elizabeth what likelihood of his amendment lords$buckingham madam good hope. his grace speaks cheerfully.$original text$queen elizabeth god grant him health. did you confer with him$buckingham ay madam. he desires to make atonement betwixt the duke of gloucester and your brothers and betwixt them and my lord chamberlain and sent to warn them to his royal presence.$queen elizabeth would all were wellbut that will never be. i fear our happiness is at the height.$enter richard duke of gloucester and hastings$richard they do me wrong and i will not endure it who is it that complains unto the king that i forsooth am stern and love them not by holy paul they love his grace but lightly that fill his ears with such dissentious rumors. because i cannot flatter and look fair smile in mens faces smooth deceive and cog duck with french nods and apish courtesy i must be held a rancorous enemy. cannot a plain man live and think no harm but thus his simple truth must be abused with silken sly insinuating jacks$rivers to whom in all this presence speaks your grace$richard to thee that hast nor honesty nor grace. when have i injured thee when done thee wrong or theeor thee or any of your faction a plague upon you all his royal grace whom god preserve better than you would wish cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while but you must trouble him with lewd complaints.$original text$queen elizabeth brother of gloucester you mistake the matter. the king on his own royal disposition and not provoked by any suitor else aiming belike at your interior hatred that in your outward actions shows itself against my children brothers and myself makes him to send that he may learn the ground.$richard i cannot tell. the world is grown so bad that wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch. since every jack became a gentleman theres many a gentle person made a jack.$queen elizabeth come come we know your meaning brother gloucester. you envy my advancement and my friends'. god grant we never may have need of you.$richard meantime god grants that we have need of you. our brother is imprisoned by your means myself disgraced and the nobility held in contempt while great promotions are daily given to ennoble those that scarce some two days since were worth a noble.$queen elizabeth by him that raised me to this careful height from that contented hap which i enjoyed i never did incense his majesty against the duke of clarence but have been an earnest advocate to plead for him. my lord you do me shameful injury falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.$original text$richard you may deny that you were not the mean of my lord hastings' late imprisonment.$rivers she may my lord for$richard she may lord rivers. why who knows not so she may do more sir than denying that. she may help you to many fair preferments and then deny her aiding hand therein and lay those honors on your high desert. what may she not she may ay marry may she$rivers what marry may she$richard what marry may she marry with a king a bachelor a handsome stripling too. i wis your grandam had a worser match.$queen elizabeth my lord of gloucester i have too long borne your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs. by heaven i will acquaint his majesty with those gross taunts that oft i have endured. i had rather be a country servantmaid than a great queen with this condition to be so baited scorned and stormed at.$enter old queen margaret apart from others$small joy have i in being englands queen.$queen margaret aside and lessened be that small god i beseech him thy honor state and seat is due to me.$original text$richard to queen elizabeth what threat you me with telling of the king tell him and spare not. look what i have said i will avouch t in presence of the king i dare adventure to be sent to th' tower. 'tis time to speak. my pains are quite forgot.$queen margaret aside out devil i do remember them too well thou killedst my husband henry in the tower and edward my poor son at tewkesbury.$richard to queen elizabeth ere you were queen ay or your husband king i was a packhorse in his great affairs a weederout of his proud adversaries a liberal rewarder of his friends. to royalize his blood i spent mine own.$queen margaret aside ay and much better blood than his or thine.$richard to queen elizabeth in all which time you and your husband grey were factious for the house of lancaster. and rivers so were you. was not your husband in margarets battle at saint albans slain let me put in your minds if you forget what you have been ere this and what you are withal what i have been and what i am.$queen margaret aside a murd'rous villain and so still thou art.$original text$richard  to queen elizabeth poor clarence did forsake his father warwick ay and forswore himselfwhich jesu pardon$queen margaret aside which god revenge$richard to fight on edwards party for the crown and for his meed poor lord he is mewed up. i would to god my heart were flint like edwards or edwards soft and pitiful like mine. i am too childishfoolish for this world.$queen margaret aside hie thee to hell for shame and leave the world thou cacodemon there thy kingdom is.$rivers my lord of gloucester in those busy days which here you urge to prove us enemies we followed then our lord our sovereign king. so should we you if you should be our king.$richard if i should be i had rather be a peddler. far be it from my heart the thought thereof.$queen elizabeth as little joy my lord as you suppose you should enjoy were you this countrys king as little joy may you suppose in me that i enjoy being the queen thereof.$original text$queen margaret  aside as little joy enjoys the queen thereof for i am she and altogether joyless. i can no longer hold me patient.$she steps forward$hear me you wrangling pirates that fall out in sharing that which you have pilled from me which of you trembles not that looks on me if not that i am queen you bow like subjects yet that by you deposed you quake like rebels. ah gentle villain do not turn away.$richard foul wrinkled witch what makst thou in my sight$queen margaret but repetition of what thou hast marred. that will i make before i let thee go.$richard wert thou not banished on pain of death$queen margaret i was but i do find more pain in banishment than death can yield me here by my abode. a husband and a son thou owst to me to queen elizabeth and thou a kingdom all of you allegiance. the sorrow that i have by right is yours and all the pleasures you usurp are mine.$richard the curse my noble father laid on thee when thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper and with thy scorns drewst rivers from his eyes and then to dry them gavst the duke a clout steeped in the faultless blood of pretty rutland his curses then from bitterness of soul denounced against thee are all fall'n upon thee and god not we hath plagued thy bloody deed.$original text$queen elizabeth so just is god to right the innocent.$hastings o twas the foulest deed to slay that babe and the most merciless that e'er was heard of$rivers tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.$dorset no man but prophesied revenge for it.$buckingham northumberland then present wept to see it.$queen margaret what were you snarling all before i came ready to catch each other by the throat and turn you all your hatred now on me did yorks dread curse prevail so much with heaven that henrys death my lovelly edwards death their kingdoms loss my woeful banishment could all but answer for that peevish brat can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven why then give way dull clouds to my quick curses though not by war by surfeit die your king as ours by murder to make him a king.$original text$queen margaret  to queen elizabeth edward thy son that now is prince of wales for edward our son that was prince of wales die in his youth by like untimely violence. thyself a queen for me that was a queen outlive thy glory like my wretched self. long mayst thou live to wail thy childrens death and see another as i see thee now decked in thy rights as thou art stalled in mine. long die thy happy days before thy death and after many lengthened hours of grief die neither mother wife nor englands queen. rivers and dorset you were standersby and so wast thou lord hastings when my son was stabbed with bloody daggers. god i pray him that none of you may live his natural age but by some unlooked accident cut off.$richard have done thy charm thou hateful withered hag.$queen margaret and leave out thee stay dog for thou shalt hear me. if heaven have any grievous plague in store exceeding those that i can wish upon thee o let them keep it till thy sins be ripe and then hurl down their indignation on thee the troubler of the poor worlds peace. the worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul. thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livst and take deep traitors for thy dearest friends. no sleep close up that deadly eye of thine unless it be while some tormenting dream affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.$original text$queen margaret thou elvishmarked abortive rooting hog thou that wast sealed in thy nativity the slave of nature and the son of hell thou slander of thy heavy mothers womb thou loathed issue of thy fathers loins thou rag of honor thou detested$richard margaret.$queen margaret richard$richard ha$queen margaret i call thee not.$richard i cry thee mercy then for i did think that thou hadst called me all these bitter names.$queen margaret why so i did but looked for no reply. o let me make the period to my curse$richard 'tis done by me and ends in margaret.$queen elizabeth to queen margaret thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.$queen margaret poor painted queen vain flourish of my fortune why strewst thou sugar on that bottled spider whose deadly web ensnareth thee about fool fool thou whetst a knife to kill thyself. the day will come that thou shalt wish for me to help thee curse that poisonous bunchbacked toad.$hastings falseboding woman end thy frantic curse lest to thy harm thou move our patience.$original text$queen margaret foul shame upon you you have all moved mine.$rivers were you well served you would be taught your duty.$queen margaret to serve me well you all should do me duty teach me to be your queen and you my subjects. o serve me well and teach yourselves that duty$dorset to rivers dispute not with her she is lunatic.$queen margaret peace master marquess you are malapert. your firenew stamp of honor is scarce current. o that your young nobility could judge what twere to lose it and be miserable they that stand high have many blasts to shake them and if they fall they dash themselves to pieces.$richard good counsel marry. learn it learn it marquess.$dorset it touches you my lord as much as me.$richard ay and much more but i was born so high. our aerie buildeth in the cedars top and dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.$queen margaret and turns the sun to shade. alas alas witness my son now in the shade of death whose bright outshining beams thy cloudy wrath hath in eternal darkness folded up. your aerie buildeth in our aeries nest. o god that seest it do not suffer it as it was won with blood lost be it so.$original text$buckingham peace peace for shame if not for charity.$queen margaret urge neither charity nor shame to me. addressing the others uncharitably with me have you dealt and shamefully my hopes by you are butchered. my charity is outrage life my shame and in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.$buckingham have done have done.$queen margaret o princely buckingham ill kiss thy hand in sign of league and amity with thee. now fair befall thee and thy noble house thy garments are not spotted with our blood nor thou within the compass of my curse.$buckingham nor no one here for curses never pass the lips of those that breathe them in the air.$queen margaret i will not think but they ascend the sky and there awake gods gentlesleeping peace. aside to buckingham o buckingham take heed of yonder dog look when he fawns he bites and when he bites his venom tooth will rankle to the death. have not to do with him. beware of him. sin death and hell have set their marks on him and all their ministers attend on him.$richard what doth she say my lord of buckingham$buckingham nothing that i respect my gracious lord.$original text$queen margaret what dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel and soothe the devil that i warn thee from o but remember this another day when he shall split thy very heart with sorrow and say poor margaret was a prophetess. live each of you the subjects to his hate and he to yours and all of you to gods.$exit$hastings my hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.$rivers and so doth mine. i muse why shes at liberty.$richard i cannot blame her. by gods holy mother she hath had too much wrong and i repent my part thereof that i have done to her.$queen elizabeth i never did her any to my knowledge.$richard yet you have all the vantage of her wrong. i was too hot to do somebody good that is too cold in thinking of it now. marry as for clarence he is well repaid he is franked up to fatting for his pains. god pardon them that are the cause thereof.$rivers a virtuous and a christianlike conclusion to pray for them that have done scathe to us.$richard so do i ever aside being welladvised for had i cursed now i had cursed myself.$enter catesby$original text$catesby madam his majesty doth call for you and for your grace and yours my gracious lords.$queen elizabeth catesby i come. lords will you go with me$rivers we wait upon your grace.$exeunt all but richard duke of gloucester$richard i do the wrong and first begin to brawl. the secret mischiefs that i set abroach i lay unto the grievous charge of others. clarence whom i indeed have cast in darkness i do beweep to many simple gulls namely to derby hastings buckingham and tell them tis the queen and her allies that stir the king against the duke my brother. now they believe it and withal whet me to be revenged on rivers dorset grey but then i sigh and with a piece of scripture tell them that god bids us do good for evil and thus i clothe my naked villainy with odd old ends stolen out of holy writ and seem a saint when most i play the devil.$enter two murderers$but soft here come my executioners. how now my hardy stout resolved mates are you now going to dispatch this thing$first murderer we are my lord and come to have the warrant that we may be admitted where he is.$original text$richard well thought upon. i have it here about me. he gives a paper when you have done repair to crosby place. but sirs be sudden in the execution withal obdurate do not hear him plead for clarence is wellspoken and perhaps may move your hearts to pity if you mark him.$first murderer tut tut my lord we will not stand to prate. talkers are no good doers. be assured we go to use our hands and not our tongues.$richard your eyes drop millstones when fools' eyes drop tears. i like you lads. about your business straight. go go dispatch.$murderers we will my noble lord.$exeunt$original text$enter clarence and keeper$keeper why looks your grace so heavily today$clarence o i have passed a miserable night so full of ugly dreams of ugly sights that as i am a christian faithful man i would not spend another such a night though twere to buy a world of happy days so full of dismal terror was the time.$keeper what was your dream my lord i pray you tell me.$clarence methoughts that i had broken from the tower and was embarked to cross to burgundy and in my company my brother gloucester who from my cabin tempted me to walk upon the hatches. thence we looked toward england and cited up a thousand fearful times during the wars of york and lancaster that had befall'n us. as we paced along upon the giddy footing of the hatches methought that gloucester stumbled and in falling struck me that thought to stay him overboard into the tumbling billows of the main. o lord methought what pain it was to drown what dreadful noise of waters in my ears what sights of ugly death within my eyes. methoughts i saw a thousand fearful wracks a thousand men that fishes gnawed upon wedges of gold great anchors heaps of pearl inestimable stones unvalued jewels all scattered in the bottom of the sea.$original text$clarence some lay in dead mens skulls and in the holes where eyes did once inhabit there were crept as twere in scorn of eyesreflecting gems that wooed the slimy bottom of the deep and mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.$keeper had you such leisure in the time of death to gaze upon the secrets of the deep$clarence methought i had and often did i strive to yield the ghost but still the envious flood stopped in my soul and would not let it forth to find the empty vast and wand'ring air but smothered it within my panting bulk who almost burst to belch it in the sea.$keeper awaked you not in this sore agony$clarence no no my dream was lengthened after life. o then began the tempest to my soul. i passed methought the melancholy flood with that sour ferryman which poets write of unto the kingdom of perpetual night. the first that there did greet my strangersoul was my great fatherinlaw renowned warwick who spake aloud what scourge for perjury can this dark monarchy afford false clarence and so he vanished. then came wand'ring by a shadow like an angel with bright hair dabbled in blood and he shrieked out aloud$original text$clarence clarence is comefalse fleeting perjured clarence that stabbed me in the field by tewkesbury. seize on him furies. take him unto torment. with that methoughts a legion of foul fiends environed me and howled in mine ears such hideous cries that with the very noise i trembling waked and for a season after could not believe but that i was in hell such terrible impression made my dream.$keeper no marvel lord though it affrighted you. i am afraid methinks to hear you tell it.$clarence ah keeper keeper i have done those things that now give evidence against my soul for edwards sake and see how he requites me. o god if my deep prayers cannot appease thee but thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds yet execute thy wrath in me alone o spare my guiltless wife and my poor children keeper i prithee sit by me awhile. my soul is heavy and i fain would sleep.$keeper i will my lord. god give your grace good rest.$clarence sleeps$enter brakenbury the lieutenant$brakenbury sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours makes the night morning and the noontide night. princes have but their titles for their glories an outward honor for an inward toil$original text$and for unfelt imaginations they often feel a world of restless cares so that betwixt their titles and low name theres nothing differs but the outward fame.$enter the two murderers$first murderer ho whos here$brakenbury what wouldst thou fellow and how camst thou hither$second murderer i would speak with clarence and i came hither on my legs.$brakenbury what so brief$first murderer 'tis better sir to be brief than tedious.let him see our commission and talk no more.$brakenbury reads the paper$brakenbury i am in this commanded to deliver the noble duke of clarence to your hands. i will not reason what is meant hereby because i will be guiltless from the meaning. there lies the duke asleep and there the keys.  he hands them the keys ill to the king and signify to him that thus i have resigned my charge to you.$first murderer you may sir. 'tis a point of wisdom. fare you well.$original text$exit brakenbury and keeper$second murderer what shall i stab him as he sleeps$first murderer no. hell say twas done cowardly when he wakes.$second murderer why he shall never wake until the great judgment day.$first murderer why then hell say we stabbed him sleeping.$second murderer the urging of that word judgment hath bred a kind of remorse in me.$first murderer what art thou afraid$second murderer not to kill him having a warrant but to be damned for killing him from the which no warrant can defend me.$first murderer i thought thou hadst been resolute.$second murderer so i amto let him live.$first murderer ill back to the duke of gloucester and tell him so.$second murderer nay i prithee stay a little. i hope this passionate humor of mine will change. it was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.$first murderer how dost thou feel thyself now$second murderer faith some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.$original text$first murderer remember our reward when the deeds done.$second murderer zounds he dies i had forgot the reward.$first murderer wheres thy conscience now$second murderer o in the duke of gloucesters purse.$first murderer so when he opens his purse to give us our reward thy conscience flies out.$second murderer 'tis no matter. let it go. theres few or none will entertain it.$first murderer what if it come to thee again$second murderer ill not meddle with it. it makes a man a coward a man cannot steal but it accuseth him a man cannot swear but it checks him a man cannot lie with his neighbors wife but it detects him. 'tis a blushing shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a mans bosom. it fills a man full of obstacles. it made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance i found. it beggars any man that keeps it. it is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.$first murderer zounds tis even now at my elbow persuading me not to kill the duke.$second murderer take the devil in thy mind and believe him not. he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.$first murderer i am strongframed. he cannot prevail with me.$original text$second murderer spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. come shall we fall to work$first murderer take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.$second murderer o excellent device and make a sop of him.$first murderer soft he wakes.$second murderer strike$first murderer no well reason with him.$clarence wakes$clarence where art thou keeper give me a cup of wine.$second murderer you shall have wine enough my lord anon.$clarence in gods name what art thou$first murderer a man as you are.$clarence but not as i am royal.$first murderer nor you as we are loyal.$clarence thy voice is thunder but thy looks are humble.$first murderer my voice is now the kings my looks mine own.$original text$clarence how darkly and how deadly dost thou speak your eyes do menace me. why look you pale who sent you hither wherefore do you come$second murderer to to to$clarence to murder me$both murderers ay ay.$clarence you scarcely have the hearts to tell me so and therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. wherein my friends have i offended you$first murderer offended us you have not but the king.$clarence i shall be reconciled to him again.$second murderer never my lord. therefore prepare to die.$clarence are you drawn forth among a world of men to slay the innocent what is my offense where is the evidence that doth accuse me what lawful quest have given their verdict up unto the frowning judge or who pronounced the bitter sentence of poor clarence' death before i be convict by course of law to threaten me with death is most unlawful. i charge you as you hope to have redemption by christs dear blood shed for our grievous sins that you depart and lay no hands on me. the deed you undertake is damnable.$first murderer what we will do we do upon command.$original text$second murderer and he that hath commanded is our king.$clarence erroneous vassals the great king of kings hath in the tables of his law commanded that thou shalt do no murder. will thou then spurn at his edict and fulfill a mans take heed for he holds vengeance in his hand to hurl upon their heads that break his law.$second murderer and that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee for false forswearing and for murder too. thou didst receive the sacrament to fight in quarrel of the house of lancaster.$first murderer and like a traitor to the name of god didst break that vow and with thy treacherous blade unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereigns son.$second murderer whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.$first murderer how canst thou urge gods dreadful law to us when thou hast broke it in such dear degree$clarence alas for whose sake did i that ill deed for edward for my brother for his sake. he sends you not to murder me for this for in that sin he is as deep as i. if god will be avenged for this deed o know you yet he doth it publicly take not the quarrel from his powerful arm he needs no indirect or lawless course to cut off those that have offended him.$original text$first murderer who made thee then a bloody minister when gallantspringing brave plantagenet that princely novice was struck dead by thee$clarence my brothers love the devil and my rage.$first murderer thy brothers love our duty and thy faults provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.$clarence if you do love my brother hate not me. i am his brother and i love him well. if you are hired for meed go back again and i will send you to my brother gloucester who shall reward you better for my life than edward will for tidings of my death.$second murderer you are deceived. your brother gloucester hates you.$clarence o no he loves me and he holds me dear. go you to him from me.$first murderer ay so we will.$clarence tell him when that our princely father york blessed his three sons with his victorious arm he little thought of this divided friendship. bid gloucester think of this and he will weep.$first murderer ay millstones as he lessoned us to weep.$clarence o do not slander him for he is kind.$original text$first murderer right as snow in harvest. come you deceive yourself. 'tis he that sends us to destroy you here.$clarence it cannot be for he bewept my fortune and hugged me in his arms and swore with sobs that he would labor my delivery.$second murderer why so he doth when he delivers you from this earths thralldom to the joys of heaven.$first murderer make peace with god for you must die my lord.$clarence have you that holy feeling in your souls to counsel me to make my peace with god and art you yet to your own souls so blind that thou will war with god by murd'ring me o sirs consider they that set you on to do this deed will hate you for the deed.$second murderer  to first murderer what shall we do$clarence relent and save your souls. which of youif you were a princes son being pent from liberty as i am now if two such murderers as yourselves came to you would not entreat for life ay you would beg were you in my distress.$first murderer relent no. 'tis cowardly and womanish.$original text$clarence not to relent is beastly savage devilish. to second murderer my friend i spy some pity in thy looks. o if thine eye be not a flatterer come thou on my side and entreat for me. a begging prince what beggar pities not$second murderer look behind you my lord.$first murderer take that and that. stabs clarence if all this will not do ill drown you in the malmsey butt within.$exit with the body$second murderer a bloody deed and desperately dispatched. how fain like pilate would i wash my hands of this most grievous murder.$enter first murderer$first murderer how now what meanst thou that thou helpst me not by heavens the duke shall know how slack you have been.$second murderer i would he knew that i had saved his brother. take thou the fee and tell him what i say for i repent me that the duke is slain.$exit$original text$first murderer so do not i. go coward as thou art. well ill go hide the body in some hole till that the duke give order for his burial. and when i have my meed i will away for this will out and then i must not stay.$exit$original text$flourish. enter king edward iv sick queen elizabeth lord marquess dorset rivers hastings buckingham grey and others$king edward iv why so. now have i done a good days work. you peers continue this united league. i every day expect an embassage from my redeemer to redeem me hence and more in peace my soul shall part to heaven since i have made my friends at peace on earth rivers and hastings take each others hand. dissemble not your hatred. swear your love.$rivers taking hastingss hand by heaven my soul is purged from grudging hate and with my hand i seal my true hearts love.$hastings so thrive i as i truly swear the like.$king edward iv take heed you dally not before your king lest he that is the supreme king of kings confound your hidden falsehood and award either of you to be the others end.$hastings so prosper i as i swear perfect love.$rivers and i as i love hastings with my heart.$original text$king edward iv to queen elizabeth madam yourself is not exempt in this nor you son dorset buckingham nor you. you have been factious one against the other. wife love lord hastings. let him kiss your hand and what you do do it unfeignedly.$queen elizabeth there hastings i will never more remember our former hatred so thrive i and mine.$hastings kisses her hand$king edward iv dorset embrace him.hastings love lord marquess.$dorset this interchange of love i here protest upon my part shall be inviolable.$hastings and so swear i.$they embrace$king edward iv now princely buckingham seal thou this league with thy embracements to my wifes allies and make me happy in your unity.$original text$buckingham to queen elizabeth whenever buckingham doth turn his hate upon your grace but with all duteous love doth cherish you and yours god punish me when i have most need to employ a friend with hate in those where i expect most love. and most assured that he is a friend deep hollow treacherous and full of guile be he unto me this do i beg of god when i am cold in love to you or yours.$they embrace$king edward iv a pleasing cordial princely buckingham is this thy vow unto my sickly heart. there wanteth now our brother gloucester here to make the blessed period of this peace.$buckingham and in good time here comes sir richard ratcliffe and the duke.$enter richard and ratcliffe$richard good morrow to my sovereign king and queen and princely peers a happy time of day.$king edward iv happy indeed as we have spent the day. gloucester we have done deeds of charity made peace of enmity fair love of hate between these swelling wrongincensed peers.$original text$richard a blessed labor my most sovereign lord. amongst this princely heap if any here by false intelligence or wrong surmise hold me a foe if i unwittingly or in my rage have aught committed that is hardly borne by any in this presence i desire to reconcile me to his friendly peace. 'tis death to me to be at enmity i hate it and desire all good mens love. first madam i entreat true peace of you which i will purchase with my duteous service of you my noble cousin buckingham if ever any grudge were lodged between us of you and you lord rivers and of dorset that all without desert have frowned on me of you lord woodeville and lord scales of you dukes earls lords gentlemen indeed of all. i do not know that englishman alive with whom my soul is any jot at odds more than the infant that is born tonight. i thank my god for my humility.$queen elizabeth a holy day shall this be kept hereafter. i would to god all strifes were well compounded. my sovereign lord i do beseech your highness to take our brother clarence to your grace.$richard why madam have i offered love for this to be so flouted in this royal presence who knows not that the gentle duke is dead$they all start$you do him injury to scorn his corse.$original text$king edward iv who knows not he is dead who knows he is$queen elizabeth allseeing heaven what a world is this$buckingham look i so pale lord dorset as the rest$dorset ay my good lord and no one in the presence but his red color hath forsook his cheeks.$king edward iv is clarence dead the order was reversed.$richard but he poor man by your first order died and that a winged mercury did bear. some tardy cripple bear the countermand that came too lag to see him buried. god grant that some less noble and less loyal nearer in bloody thoughts and not in blood deserve not worse than wretched clarence did and yet go current from suspicion.$enter lord stanley earl of derby$stanley  kneeling a boon my sovereign for my service done.$king edward iv i prithee peace. my soul is full of sorrow.$stanley i will not rise unless your highness hear me.$king edward iv then say at once what is it thou requests.$stanley the forfeit sovereign of my servants life who slew today a riotous gentleman lately attendant on the duke of norfolk.$original text$king edward iv have i a tongue to doom my brothers death and shall the tongue give pardon to a slave my brother killed no man his fault was thought and yet his punishment was bitter death. who sued to me for him who in my wrath kneeled at my feet and bade me be advised who spoke of brotherhood who spoke of love who told me how the poor soul did forsake the mighty warwick and did fight for me who told me in the field by tewkesbury when oxford had me down he rescued me and said dear brother live and be a king who told me when we both lay in the field frozen almost to death how he did lap me even in his garments and did give himself all thin and naked to the numbcold night all this from my remembrance brutish wrath sinfully plucked and not a man of you had so much grace to put it in my mind. but when your carters or your waiting vassals have done a drunken slaughter and defaced the precious image of our dear redeemer you straight are on your knees for pardon pardon and i unjustly too must grant it you. stanley rises but for my brother not a man would speak nor i ungracious speak unto myself for him poor soul. the proudest of you all have been beholding to him in his life yet none of you would once beg for his life. o god i fear thy justice will take hold on me and you and mine and yours for this come hastings help me to my closet. ah poor clarence.$original text$exeunt some with king edward iv and queen elizabeth$richard this is the fruits of rashness. marked you not how that the guilty kindred of the queen looked pale when they did hear of clarence' death o they did urge it still unto the king. god will revenge it. come lords will you go to comfort edward with our company$buckingham we wait upon your grace.$exeunt$original text$enter the old duchess of york with the two children of clarence$boy good grandam tell us is our father dead$duchess no boy.$girl why do you weep so oft and beat your breast and cry o clarence my unhappy son$boy why do you look on us and shake your head and call us orphans wretches castaways if that our noble father were alive$duchess my pretty cousins you mistake me both. i do lament the sickness of the king as loath to lose him not your fathers death. it were lost sorrow to wail one thats lost.$boy then you conclude my grandam he is dead. the king mine uncle is to blame for it. god will revenge it whom i will importune with earnest prayers all to that effect.$girl and so will i.$duchess peace children peace. the king doth love you well. incapable and shallow innocents you cannot guess who caused your fathers death.$original text$boy grandam we can for my good uncle gloucester told me the king provoked to it by the queen devised impeachments to imprison him and when my uncle told me so he wept and pitied me and kindly kissed my cheek bade me rely on him as on my father and he would love me dearly as a child.$duchess ah that deceit should steal such gentle shape and with a virtuous visor hide deep vice. he is my son ay and therein my shame yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.$boy think you my uncle did dissemble grandam$duchess ay boy.$boy i cannot think it. hark what noise is this$enter queen elizabeth with her hair about her ears rivers and dorset after her$queen elizabeth ah who shall hinder me to wail and weep to chide my fortune and torment myself ill join with black despair against my soul and to myself become an enemy.$duchess what means this scene of rude impatience$queen elizabeth to make an act of tragic violence. edward my lord thy son our king is dead. why grow the branches when the root is gone why wither not the leaves that want their sap$original text$if you will live lament. if die be brief that our swiftwinged souls may catch the kings or like obedient subjects follow him to his new kingdom of ne'erchanging night.$duchess ah so much interest have i in thy sorrow as i had title in thy noble husband. i have bewept a worthy husbands death and lived with looking on his images but now two mirrors of his princely semblance are cracked in pieces by malignant death and i for comfort have but one false glass that grieves me when i see my shame in him. thou art a widow yet thou art a mother and hast the comfort of thy children left but death hath snatched my husband from mine arms and plucked two crutches from my feeble hands clarence and edward. o what cause have i thine being but a moiety of my moan to overgo thy woes and drown thy cries$boy to queen elizabeth ah aunt you wept not for our fathers death. how can we aid you with our kindred tears$girl our fatherless distress was left unmoaned. your widowdolor likewise be unwept$queen elizabeth give me no help in lamentation. i am not barren to bring forth complaints. all springs reduce their currents to mine eyes that i being governed by the watery moon may send forth plenteous tears to drown the world. ah for my husband for my dear lord edward$original text$children ah for our father for our dear lord clarence$duchess alas for both both mine edward and clarence$queen elizabeth what stay had i but edward and hes gone.$children what stay had we but clarence and hes gone.$duchess what stays had i but they and they are gone.$queen elizabeth was never widow had so dear a loss.$children were never orphans had so dear a loss.$duchess was never mother had so dear a loss. alas i am the mother of these griefs. their woes are parceled mine are general. she for an edward weeps and so do i i for a clarence weep so doth not she. these babes for clarence weep and so do i i for an edward weep so do not they. alas you three on me threefold distressed pour all your tears. i am your sorrows nurse and i will pamper it with lamentations.$original text$dorset to queen elizabeth comfort dear mother. god is much displeased that you take with unthankfulness his doing. in common worldly things tis called ungrateful with dull unwillingness to repay a debt which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent much more to be thus opposite with heaven for it requires the royal debt it lent you.$rivers madam bethink you like a careful mother of the young prince your son. send straight for him. let him be crowned. in him your comfort lives. drown desperate sorrow in dead edwards grave and plant your joys in living edwards throne.$enter richard buckingham stanley hastings and ratcliffe$richard sister have comfort. all of us have cause to wail the dimming of our shining star but none can help our harms by wailing them. madam my mother i do cry you mercy i did not see your grace. humbly on my knee i crave your blessing.$he kneels$duchess god bless thee and put meekness in thy breast love charity obedience and true duty.$richard standing amen. aside and make me die a good old man that is the butt end of a mothers blessing i marvel that her grace did leave it out.$original text$buckingham you cloudy princes and heartsorrowing peers that bear this heavy mutual load of moan now cheer each other in each others love. though we have spent our harvest of this king we are to reap the harvest of his son. the broken rancor of your highswoll'n hates but lately splintered knit and joined together must gently be preserved cherished and kept. meseemeth good that with some little train forthwith from ludlow the young prince be fet hither to london to be crowned our king.$rivers why with some little train my lord of buckingham$buckingham marry my lord lest by a multitude the newhealed wound of malice should break out which would be so much the more dangerous by how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned. where every horse bears his commanding rein and may direct his course as please himself as well the fear of harm as harm apparent in my opinion ought to be prevented.$richard i hope the king made peace with all of us and the compact is firm and true in me.$rivers and so in me and so i think in all. yet since it is but green it should be put to no apparent likelihood of breach which haply by much company might be urged. therefore i say with noble buckingham that it is meet so few should fetch the prince.$hastings and so say i.$original text$richard then be it so and go we to determine who they shall be that straight shall post to ludlow. madam and you my sister will you go to give your censures in this business$exeunt all but buckingham and richard$buckingham my lord whoever journeys to the prince for gods sake let not us two at home. for by the way ill sort occasion as index to the story we late talked of to part the queens proud kindred from the prince.$richard my other self my councils consistory my oracle my prophet my dear cousin i as a child will go by thy direction toward ludlow then for well not stay behind.$exeunt$original text$enter one citizen at one door and another at the other$first citizen good morrow neighbor whither away so fast$second citizen i promise you i scarcely know myself. hear you the news abroad$first citizen yes that the king is dead.$second citizen ill news by 'r lady. seldom comes the better. i fear i fear twill prove a giddy world.$enter third citizen$third citizen neighbors god speed.$first citizen give you good morrow sir.$third citizen doth this news hold of good king edwards death$second citizen ay sir it is too true god help the while.$third citizen then masters look to see a troublous world.$first citizen no no by gods good grace his son shall reign.$third citizen woe to the land thats governed by a child.$second citizen in him there is a hope of government which in his nonage council under him and in his full and ripened years himself no doubt shall then and till then govern well.$original text$first citizen so stood the state when henry the sixth was crowned in paris but at nine months old.$third citizen stood the state so no no good friends god wot for then this land was famously enriched with politic grave counsel then the king had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.$first citizen why so hath this both by the father and mother.$third citizen better it were they all came by his father or by the father there were none at all for emulation who shall now be nearest will touch us all too near if god prevent not. o full of danger is the duke of gloucester and the queens sons and brothers haught and proud and were they to be ruled and not to rule this sickly land might solace as before.$first citizen come come we fear the worst. all will be well.$third citizen when clouds are seen wise men put on their cloaks when great leaves fall then winter is at hand when the sun sets who doth not look for night untimely storms make men expect a dearth. all may be well but if god sort it so 'tis more than we deserve or i expect.$second citizen truly the hearts of men are full of fear. ye cannot reason almost with a man that looks not heavily and full of dread.$original text$third citizen before the days of change still is it so. by a divine instinct mens minds mistrust ensuing dangers as by proof we see the water swell before a boist'rous storm. but leave it all to god. whither away$second citizen marry we were sent for to the justices.$third citizen and so was i. ill bear you company.$exeunt$original text$enter the archbishop of york the young duke of york queen elizabeth and the old duchess of york$archbishop last night i hear they lay at stony stratford and at northampton they do rest tonight. tomorrow or next day they will be here.$duchess i long with all my heart to see the prince. i hope he is much grown since last i saw him.$queen elizabeth but i hear no they say my son of york has almost overta'en him in his growth.$york ay mother but i would not have it so.$duchess why my young cousin it is good to grow.$york grandam one night as we did sit at supper my uncle rivers talked how i did grow more than my brother ay quoth my uncle gloucester small herbs have grace great weeds do grow apace. and since methinks i would not grow so fast because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.$duchess good faith good faith the saying did not hold in him that did object the same to thee he was the wretchedst thing when he was young so long agrowing and so leisurely that if this rule were true he should be gracious.$york and so no doubt he is my gracious madam.$original text$duchess i hope he is but yet let mothers doubt.$york now by my troth if i had been remembered i could have given my uncles grace a flout to touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.$duchess how my pretty york i prithee let me hear it.$york marry they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw a crust at two hours old. 'twas full two years ere i could get a tooth. grandam this would have been a biting jest.$duchess i prithee pretty york who told thee this$york grandam his nurse.$duchess his nurse why she was dead ere thou wast born.$york if twere not she i cannot tell who told me.$queen elizabeth a parlous boy go to you are too shrewd.$duchess good madam be not angry with the child.$queen elizabeth pitchers have ears.$enter a messenger$archbishop here comes a messenger. what news$messenger such news my lord as grieves me to report.$original text$queen elizabeth how doth the prince$messenger well madam and in health.$duchess what is thy news then$messenger lord rivers and lord grey are sent to pomfret and with them sir thomas vaughan prisoners.$duchess who hath committed them$messenger the mighty dukes gloucester and buckingham.$archbishop for what offence$messenger the sum of all i can i have disclosed. why or for what the nobles were committed is all unknown to me my gracious lord.$queen elizabeth ay me i see the ruin of my house. the tiger now hath seized the gentle hind. insulting tyranny begins to jut upon the innocent and aweless throne. welcome destruction blood and massacre. i see as in a map the end of all.$original text$duchess accursed and unquiet wrangling days how many of you have mine eyes beheld my husband lost his life to get the crown and often up and down my sons were tossed for me to joy and weep their gain and loss. and being seated and domestic broils clean overblown themselves the conquerors make war upon themselves brother to brother blood to blood self against self. o preposterous and frantic outrage end thy damned spleen or let me die to look on death no more.$queen elizabeth to york come come my boy. we will to sanctuary. madam farewell.$duchess stay i will go with you$queen elizabeth you have no cause.$archbishop to queen elizabeth my gracious lady go and thither bear your treasure and your goods. for my part ill resign unto your grace the seal i keep and so betide to me as well i tender you and all of yours. go. ill conduct you to the sanctuary.$exeunt$original text$the trumpets sound. enter the young prince thecardinal catesby and others$buckingham welcome sweet prince to london to your chamber.$richard to prince welcome dear cousin my thoughts' sovereign. the weary way hath made you melancholy.$prince no uncle but our crosses on the way have made it tedious wearisome and heavy. i want more uncles here to welcome me.$richard sweet prince the untainted virtue of your years hath not yet dived into the worlds deceit nor more can you distinguish of a man than of his outward show which god he knows seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. those uncles which you want were dangerous. your grace attended to their sugared words but looked not on the poison of their hearts. god keep you from them and from such false friends.$prince god keep me from false friends but they were none.$richard my lord the mayor of london comes to greet you.$enter the lord mayor and his train$original text$lord mayor god bless your grace with health and happy days.$prince i thank you good my lord and thank you all. i thought my mother and my brother york would long ere this have met us on the way. fie what a slug is hastings that he comes not to tell us whether they will come or no$enter hastings$buckingham and in good time here comes the sweating lord.$prince welcome my lord. what will our mother come$hastings on what occasion god he knows not i the queen your mother and your brother york have taken sanctuary. the tender prince would fain have come with me to meet your grace but by his mother was perforce withheld.$buckingham fie what an indirect and peevish course is this of hers lord cardinal will your grace persuade the queen to send the duke of york unto his princely brother presently if she deny lord hastings go with him and from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.$cardinal my lord of buckingham if my weak oratory can from his mother win the duke of york anon expect him here but if she be obdurate to mild entreaties god in heaven forbid we should infringe the holy privilege of blessed sanctuary not for all this land would i be guilty of so deep a sin.$original text$buckingham you are too senseless obstinate my lord too ceremonious and traditional. weigh it but with the grossness of this age you break not sanctuary in seizing him. the benefit thereof is always granted to those whose dealings have deserved the place and those who have the wit to claim the place. this prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it and therefore in mine opinion cannot have it. then taking him from thence that is not there you break no privilege nor charter there. oft have i heard of sanctuary men but sanctuary children ne'er till now.$cardinal my lord you shall o'errule my mind for once. come on lord hastings will you go with me$hastings i go my lord.$prince good lords make all the speedy haste you may.$exeunt cardinal and hastings$say uncle gloucester if our brother come where shall we sojourn till our coronation$richard where it seems best unto your royal self. if i may counsel you some day or two your highness shall repose you at the tower then where you please and shall be thought most fit for your best health and recreation.$prince i do not like the tower of any place. did julius caesar build that place my lord$original text$buckingham he did my gracious lord begin that place which since succeeding ages have reedified.$prince is it upon record or else reported successively from age to age he built it$buckingham upon record my gracious lord.$prince but say my lord it were not registered methinks the truth should live from age to age as twere retailed to all posterity even to the general allending day.$richard aside so wise so young they say do never live long.$prince what say you uncle$richard i say without characters fame lives long. aside thus like the formal vice iniquity i moralize two meanings in one word.$prince that julius caesar was a famous man. with what his valor did enrich his wit his wit set down to make his valor live. death makes no conquest of this conqueror for now he lives in fame though not in life. ill tell you what my cousin buckingham$original text$buckingham what my gracious lord$prince an if i live until i be a man ill win our ancient right in france again or die a soldier as i lived a king.$richard aside short summers lightly have a forward spring.$enter young york hastings and the cardinal$buckingham now in good time here comes the duke of york.$prince richard of york how fares our loving brother$york well my dread lordso must i call you now.$prince ay brother to our grief as it is yours. too late he died that might have kept that title which by his death hath lost much majesty.$richard how fares our cousin noble lord of york$york i thank you gentle uncle. o my lord you said that idle weeds are fast in growth. the prince my brother hath outgrown me far.$richard he hath my lord.$york and therefore is he idle$original text$richard o my fair cousin i must not say so.$york then is he more beholding to you than i.$richard he may command me as my sovereign but you have power in me as in a kinsman.$york i pray you uncle give me this dagger.$richard my dagger little cousin with all my heart.$prince a beggar brother$york of my kind uncle that i know will give and being but a toy which is no grief to give.$richard a greater gift than that ill give my cousin.$york a greater gift o thats the sword to it.$richard ay gentle cousin were it light enough.$york o then i see you will part but with light gifts. in weightier things youll say a beggar nay.$richard it is too heavy for your grace to wear.$york i weigh it lightly were it heavier.$richard what would you have my weapon little lord$york i would that i might thank you as you call me.$richard how$original text$york little.$prince my lord of york will still be cross in talk. uncle your grace knows how to bear with him.$york you mean to bear me not to bear with me. uncle my brother mocks both you and me. because that i am little like an ape he thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.$buckingham aside with what a sharpprovided wit he reasons to mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle he prettily and aptly taunts himself. so cunning and so young is wonderful.$richard to prince my lord will t please you pass along myself and my good cousin buckingham will to your mother to entreat of her to meet you at the tower and welcome you.$york to prince what will you go unto the tower my lord$prince my lord protector needs will have it so.$york i shall not sleep in quiet at the tower.$richard why what should you fear$york marry my uncle clarence' angry ghost. my grandam told me he was murdered there.$original text$prince i fear no uncles dead.$richard nor none that live i hope.$prince an if they live i hope i need not fear.  to york but come my lord. with a heavy heart thinking on them go i unto the tower.$a sennet. exeunt all but richard buckingham and catesby$buckingham think you my lord this little prating york was not incensed by his subtle mother to taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously$richard no doubt no doubt. o tis a parlous boy bold quick ingenious forward capable. he is all the mothers from the top to toe.$buckingham well let them rest.come hither catesby. thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend as closely to conceal what we impart. thou knowest our reasons urged upon the way. what thinkest thou is it not an easy matter to make william lord hastings of our mind for the installment of this noble duke in the seat royal of this famous isle$catesby he for his fathers sake so loves the prince that he will not be won to aught against him.$buckingham what thinkst thou then of stanley will not he$catesby he will do all in all as hastings doth.$original text$buckingham well then no more but this go gentle catesby and as it were far off sound thou lord hastings how he doth stand affected to our purpose and summon him tomorrow to the tower to sit about the coronation. if thou dost find him tractable to us encourage him and show him all our reasons. if he be leaden icy cold unwilling be thou so too and so break off the talk and give us notice of his inclination for we tomorrow hold divided councils wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.$richard commend me to lord william. tell him catesby his ancient knot of dangerous adversaries tomorrow are let blood at pomfret castle and bid my lord for joy of this good news give mistress shore one gentle kiss the more.$buckingham good catesby go effect this business soundly.$catesby my good lords both with all the heed i can.$richard shall we hear from you catesby ere we sleep$catesby you shall my lord.$richard at crosby place there shall you find us both.$exit catesby$buckingham now my lord what shall we do if we perceive lord hastings will not yield to our complots$original text$richard chop off his head. something we will determine. and look when i am king claim thou of me the earldom of hereford and all the moveables whereof the king my brother was possessed.$buckingham ill claim that promise at your graces hands.$richard and look to have it yielded with all kindness. come let us sup betimes that afterwards we may digest our complots in some form.$exeunt$original text$enter a messenger at door of hastings$messenger knocking my lord my lord.$hastings within who knocks$messenger one from the lord stanley.$hastings within what is t oclock$messenger upon the stroke of four.$enter hastings$hastings cannot my lord stanley sleep these tedious nights$messenger so it appears by that i have to say. first he commends him to your noble self.$hastings what then$messenger then certifies your lordship that this night he dreamt the boar had razed his helm besides he says there are two councils kept and that may be determined at the one which may make you and him to rue at th' other. therefore he sends to know your lordships pleasure if you will presently take horse with him and with all speed post with him toward the north to shun the danger that his soul divines.$original text$hastings go fellow go. return unto thy lord. bid him not fear the separated council. his honor and myself are at the one and at the other is my good friend catesby where nothing can proceed that toucheth us whereof i shall not have intelligence. tell him his fears are shallow without instance. and for his dreams i wonder hes so simple to trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers. to fly the boar before the boar pursues were to incense the boar to follow us and make pursuit where he did mean no chase. go bid thy master rise and come to me and we will both together to the tower where he shall see the boar will use us kindly.$messenger ill go my lord and tell him what you say.$exits.$enter catesby$catesby many good morrows to my noble lord.$hastings good morrow catesby. you are early stirring. what news what news in this our tott'ring state$catesby it is a reeling world indeed my lord and i believe will never stand upright till richard wear the garland of the realm.$hastings how wear the garland dost thou mean the crown$original text$catesby ay my good lord.$hastings ill have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders before ill see the crown so foul misplaced. but canst thou guess that he doth aim at it$catesby ay on my life and hopes to find you forward upon his party for the gain thereof and thereupon he sends you this good news that this same very day your enemies the kindred of the queen must die at pomfret.$hastings indeed i am no mourner for that news because they have been still my adversaries. but that ill give my voice on richards side to bar my masters heirs in true descent god knows i will not do it to the death.$catesby god keep your lordship in that gracious mind.$hastings but i shall laugh at this a twelvemonth hence that they which brought me in my masters hate i live to look upon their tragedy. well catesby ere a fortnight make me older ill send some packing that yet think not on t.$catesby 'tis a vile thing to die my gracious lord when men are unprepared and look not for it.$hastings o monstrous monstrous and so falls it out with rivers vaughan grey and so twill do with some men else that think themselves as safe as thou and i who as thou knowst are dear to princely richard and to buckingham.$original text$catesby the princes both make high account of you aside for they account his head upon the bridge.$hastings i know they do and i have well deserved it.$enter stanley$come on come on. where is your boarspear man fear you the boar and go so unprovided$stanley my lord good morrow. good morrow catesby. you may jest on but by the holy rood i do not like these several councils i.$hastings my lord i hold my life as dear as you do yours and never in my days i do protest was it so precious to me as tis now. think you but that i know our state secure i would be so triumphant as i am$stanley the lords at pomfret when they rode from london were jocund and supposed their states were sure and they indeed had no cause to mistrust but yet you see how soon the day o'ercast. this sudden stab of rancor i misdoubt. pray god i say i prove a needless coward what shall we toward the tower the day is spent.$original text$hastings come come. have with you. wot you what my lord today the lords you talked of are beheaded.$lord stanley they for their truth might better wear their heads than some that have accused them wear their hats. but come my lord lets away.$enter a pursuivant$hastings go on before. ill talk with this good fellow.$exeunt stanley and catesby$how now sirrah how goes the world with thee$pursuivant the better that your lordship please to ask.$hastings i tell thee man tis better with me now than when thou metst me last where now we meet. then was i going prisoner to the towerby the suggestion of the queens allies. but now i tell theekeep it to thyself this day those enemies are put to death and i in better state than e'er i was.$pursuivant god hold it to your honors good content$hastings gramercy fellow. there drink that for me.$throws him his purse$pursuivant i thank your honor.$exit$original text$enter a priest$priest well met my lord. i am glad to see your honor.$hastings i thank thee good sir john with all my heart. i am in your debt for your last exercise. come the next sabbath and i will content you.$priest ill wait upon your lordship$hastings whispers in his ear.$exit priest$enter buckingham$buckingham what talking with a priest lord chamberlain your friends at pomfret they do need the priest your honor hath no shriving work in hand.$hastings good faith and when i met this holy man the men you talk of came into my mind. what go you toward the tower$buckingham i do my lord but long i shall not stay there. i shall return before your lordship thence.$hastings nay like enough for i stay dinner there.$buckingham aside and supper too although thou knowst it not. come will you go$hastings ill wait upon your lordship.$exeunt$original text$enter sir richard ratcliffe with halberds carrying rivers grey and vaughan to death at pomfret.$rivers sir richard ratcliffe let me tell thee this today shalt thou behold a subject die for truth for duty and for loyalty.$grey to ratcliffe god bless the prince from all the pack of you a knot you are of damned bloodsuckers.$vaughan to ratcliffe you live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.$ratcliffe dispatch. the limit of your lives is out.$rivers o pomfret pomfret o thou bloody prison fatal and ominous to noble peers within the guilty closure of thy walls richard the second here was hacked to death and for more slander to thy dismal seat we give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.$grey now margarets curse is fall'n upon our heads when she exclaimed on hastings you and i for standing by when richard stabbed her son.$rivers then cursed she richard then cursed she buckingham. then cursed she hastings. o remember god to hear her prayer for them as now for us and for my sister and her princely sons be satisfied dear god with our true blood which as thou knowst unjustly must be spilt.$original text$ratcliffe make haste. the hour of death is expiate.$rivers come grey. come vaughan. let us all embrace. they embrace farewell until we meet in heaven.$exeunt$original text$enter buckingham stanley hastings the bishop of ely ratcliffe lovell with others at a table$hastings now noble peers. the cause why we are met is to determine of the coronation. in gods name speak. when is the royal day$buckingham is all things ready for the royal time$stanley it is and wants but nomination.$ely tomorrow then i judge a happy day.$buckingham who knows the lord protectors mind herein who is most inward with the noble duke$ely your grace we think should soonest know his mind.$buckingham we know each others faces for our hearts he knows no more of mine than i of yours or i of his my lord than you of mine. lord hastings you and he are near in love.$hastings i thank his grace. i know he loves me well. but for his purpose in the coronation i have not sounded him nor he delivered his gracious pleasure any way therein. but you my honorable lords may name the time and in the dukes behalf ill give my voice which i presume hell take in gentle part.$enter richard$original text$ely in happy time here comes the duke himself.$richard my noble lords and cousins all good morrow. i have been long a sleeper but i trust my absence doth neglect no great design which by my presence might have been concluded.$buckingham had you not come upon your cue my lord william lord hastings had pronounced your part i mean your voice for crowning of the king.$richard than my lord hastings no man might be bolder. his lordship knows me well and loves me well. my lord of ely when i was last in holborn i saw good strawberries in your garden there i do beseech you send for some of them.$ely marry and will my lord with all my heart.$exit$richard cousin of buckingham a word with you. they move aside catesby hath sounded hastings in our business and finds the testy gentleman so hot as he will lose his head ere give consent his masters child as worshipfully he terms it shall lose the royalty of englands throne.$buckingham withdraw yourself awhile. ill go with you.$exeunt richard and buckingham$original text$stanley we have not yet set down this day of triumph. tomorrow in my judgement is too sudden for i myself am not so well provided as else i would be were the day prolonged.$enter bishop of ely$ely where is my lord the duke of gloucester i have sent for these strawberries.$hastings his grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning. theres some conceit or other likes him well when that he bids good morrow with such spirit. i think theres never a man in christendom can lesser hide his love or hate than he for by his face straight shall you know his heart.$stanley what of his heart perceive you in his face by any livelihood he showed today$hastings marry that with no man here he is offended for were he he had shown it in his looks.$stanley i pray god he be not i say.$enter richard and buckingham$richard i pray you all tell me what they deserve that do conspire my death with devilish plots of damned witchcraft and that have prevailed upon my body with their hellish charms$original text$hastings the tender love i bear your grace my lord makes me most forward in this princely presence to doom th' offenders whosoe'er they be. i say my lord they have deserved death.$richard then be your eyes the witness of their evil. shows his arm look how i am bewitched behold mine arm is like a blasted sapling withered up and this is edwards wife that monstrous witch consorted with that harlot strumpet shore that by their witchcraft thus have marked me.$hastings if they have done this deed my noble lord$richard if thou protector of this damned strumpet talkst thou to me of ifs thou art a traitor off with his head. now by saint paul i swear i will not dine until i see the same. lovell and ratcliffe look that it be done. the rest that love me rise and follow me.$exeunt all but hastings ratcliffe and lovell$hastings woe woe for england not a whit for me for i too fond might have prevented this. stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm and i did scorn it and disdain to fly. three times today my footcloth horse did stumble and started when he looked upon the tower as loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse. o now i need the priest that spake to me$original text$hastings i now repent i told the pursuivant as too triumphing how mine enemies today at pomfret bloodily were butchered and i myself secure in grace and favor. o margaret margaret now thy heavy curse is lighted on poor hastings' wretched head.$ratcliffe come come dispatch. the duke would be at dinner. make a short shrift. he longs to see your head.$hastings o momentary grace of mortal men which we more hunt for than the grace of god who builds his hopes in air of your good looks lives like a drunken sailor on a mast ready with every nod to tumble down into the fatal bowels of the deep.$lovell come come dispatch. 'tis bootless to exclaim.$hastings o bloody richard miserable england i prophesy the fearfullst time to thee that ever wretched age hath looked upon. come lead me to the block. bear him my head. they smile at me that shortly shall be dead.$exeunt$original text$enter richard and buckingham in rotten armor marvelous illfavored$richard come cousin canst thou quake and change thy color murder thy breath in the middle of a word and then begin again and stop again as if thou wert distraught and mad with terror$buckingham tut i can counterfeit the deep tragedian speak and look back and pry on every side tremble and start at wagging of a straw intending deep suspicion. ghastly looks are at my service like enforced smiles and both are ready in their offices at any time to grace my stratagems. but what is catesby gone$richard he is and see he brings the mayor along.$enter the lord mayor and catesby$buckingham lord mayor$richard look to the drawbridge there$buckingham hark a drum$richard catesby o'erlook the walls.$exit catesby$original text$buckingham lord mayor the reason we have sent$richard look back defend thee here are enemies.$buckingham god and our innocence defend and guard us$enter lovell and ratcliffe with hastingss head$richard be patient. they are friends ratcliffe and lovell.$lovell here is the head of that ignoble traitor the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.$richard so dear i loved the man that i must weep. i took him for the plainest harmless creature that breathed upon this earth a christian made him my book wherein my soul recorded the history of all her secret thoughts. so smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue that his apparent open guilt omitted i mean his conversation with shores wife he lived from all attainder of suspects.$buckingham well well he was the covertst sheltered traitor that ever lived. would you imagine or almost believe were t not that by great preservation we live to tell it that subtle traitor this day had plotted in the council house to murder me and my good lord of gloucester$lord mayor had he done so$original text$richard what think you we are turks or infidels or that we would against the form of law proceed thus rashly in the villains death but that the extreme peril of the case the peace of england and our persons' safety enforced us to this execution$lord mayor now fair befall you he deserved his death and your good graces both have well proceeded to warn false traitors from the like attempts.$buckingham i never looked for better at his hands after he once fell in with mistress shore. yet had we not determined he should die until your lordship came to see his end which now the loving haste of these our friends something against our meaning have prevented because my lord i would have had you heard the traitor speak and timorously confess the manner and the purpose of his treasons that you might well have signified the same unto the citizens who haply may misconstrue us in him and wail his death.$lord mayor but my good lord your graces' words shall serve as well as i had seen and heard him speak and do not doubt right noble princes both but ill acquaint our duteous citizens with all your just proceedings in this case.$richard and to that end we wished your lordship here t' avoid the censures of the carping world.$original text$buckingham which since you come too late of our intent yet witness what you hear we did intend. and so my good lord mayor we bid farewell.$exit lord mayor$richard go after after cousin buckingham. the mayor towards guildhall hies him in all post. there at your meetest vantage of the time infer the bastardy of edwards children. tell them how edward put to death a citizen only for saying he would make his son heir to the crownmeaning indeed his house which by the sign thereof was termed so. moreover urge his hateful luxury and bestial appetite in change of lust which stretched to their servants daughters wives even where his raging eye or savage heart without control lusted to make his prey. nay for a need thus far come near my person tell them when that my mother went with child of that insatiate edward noble york my princely father then had wars in france and by true computation of the time found that the issue was not his begot which well appeared in his lineaments being nothing like the noble duke my father. yet touch this sparingly as twere far off because my lord you know my mother lives.$original text$buckingham doubt not my lord. ill play the orator as if the golden fee for which i plead were for myself. and so my lord adieu.$richard if you thrive well bring them to baynards castle where you shall find me well accompanied with reverend fathers and welllearned bishops.$buckingham i go and towards three or four o'clock look for the news that the guildhall affords.$exit$richard go lovell with all speed to doctor shaw. to ratcliffe go thou to friar penker. bid them both meet me within this hour at baynards castle.$exit lovell and ratcliffe$now will i go to take some privy order to draw the brats of clarence out of sight and to give order that no manner of person have any time recourse unto the princes.$exit$original text$enter a scrivener with paper$scrivener this is the indictment of the good lord hastings which in a set hand fairly is engrossed that it may be today read o'er in pauls. and mark how well the sequel hangs together eleven hours i have spent to write it over for yesternight by catesby was it sent me the precedent was full as long adoing and yet within these five hours hastings lived untainted unexamined free at liberty. heres a good world the while. who is so gross that cannot see this palpable device yet who so bold but says he sees it not bad is the world and all will come to naught when such ill dealing must be seen in thought.$exit$original text$enter richard and buckingham at several doors$richard how now how now what say the citizens$buckingham now by the holy mother of our lord the citizens are mum say not a word.$richard touched you the bastardy of edwards children$buckingham i did with his contract with lady lucy and his contract by deputy in france th' unsatiate greediness of his desire and his enforcement of the city wives his tyranny for trifles his own bastardy as being got your father then in france his resemblance being not like the duke. withal i did infer your lineaments being the right idea of your father both in your form and nobleness of mind laid open all your victories in scotland your discipline in war wisdom in peace your bounty virtue fair humility indeed left nothing fitting for your purpose untouched or slightly handled in discourse. and when mine oratory grew toward end i bid them that did love their countrys good cry god save richard englands royal king$richard and did they so$original text$buckingham no. so god help me they spake not a word but like dumb statues or breathing stones stared each on other and looked deadly pale which when i saw i reprehended them and asked the mayor what meant this willful silence. his answer was the people were not used to be spoke to but by the recorder. then he was urged to tell my tale again thus saith the duke. thus hath the duke inferred but nothing spoke in warrant from himself. when he had done some followers of mine own at the lower end of the hall hurled up their caps and some ten voices cried god save king richard and thus i took the vantage of those few. thanks gentle citizens and friends quoth i. this general applause and cheerful shout argues your wisdoms and your love to richard and even here brake off and came away.$richard what tongueless blocks were they would not they speak will not the mayor then and his brethren come$buckingham the mayor is here at hand. intend some fear be not you spoke with but by mighty suit. and look you get a prayer book in your hand and stand between two churchmen good my lord for on that ground ill make a holy descant. and be not easily won to our requests. play the maids part still answer nay and take it.$richard i go. an if you plead as well for them as i can say nay to thee for myself no doubt we bring it to a happy issue.$knocking within$original text$buckingham go go up to the leads. the lord mayor knocks.$exit richard$enter the lord mayor and citizens$welcome my lord. i dance attendance here. i think the duke will not be spoke withal.$enter catesby$now catesby what says your lord to my request$catesby he doth entreat your grace my noble lord to visit him tomorrow or next day. he is within with two right reverend fathers divinely bent to meditation and in no worldly suits would he be moved to draw him from his holy exercise.$buckingham return good catesby to the gracious duke. tell him myself the mayor and aldermen no less importing than our general good in deep designs and matters of great moment are come to have some conference with his grace.$catesby ill signify so much unto him straight.$exit$original text$buckingham ah ha my lord this prince is not an edward he is not lolling on a lewd love bed but on his knees at meditation not dallying with a brace of courtesans but meditating with two deep divines not sleeping to engross his idle body but praying to enrich his watchful soul. happy were england would this virtuous prince take on his grave the sovereignty thereof. but sure i fear we shall not win him to it.$lord mayor marry god defend his grace should say us nay$buckingham i fear he will. here catesby comes again.$enter catesby$now catesby what says his grace$catesby he wonders to what end you have assembled such troops of citizens to come to him his grace not being warned thereof before. he fears my lord you mean no good to him.$buckingham sorry i am my noble cousin should suspect me that i mean no good to him. by heaven we come to him in perfect love and so once more return and tell his grace.$exit catesby$when holy and devout religious men are at their beads tis much to draw them thence so sweet is zealous contemplation.$original text$enter richard aloft between two bishops catesby returns$lord mayor see where his grace stands tween two clergymen.$buckingham two props of virtue for a christian prince to stay him from the fall of vanity and see a book of prayer in his hand true ornaments to know a holy man. famous plantagenet most gracious prince lend favorable ears to our requests and pardon us the interruption of thy devotion and right christian zeal.$richard my lord there needs no such apology. i do beseech your grace pardon me who earnest in the service of my god deferred the visitation of my friends. but leaving this what is your graces pleasure$buckingham even that i hope which pleaseth god above and all good men of this ungoverned isle.$richard i do suspect i have done some offense that seems disgracious in the citys eye and that you come to reprehend my ignorance.$buckingham you have my lord. would it might please your grace on our entreaties to amend your fault.$richard else wherefore breathe i in a christian land$original text$buckingham know then it is your fault that you resign the supreme seat the throne majestical the sceptered office of your ancestors your state of fortune and your due of birth the lineal glory of your royal house to the corruption of a blemished stock whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts which here we waken to our countrys good the noble isle doth want her proper limbs her face defaced with scars of infamy her royal stock graft with ignoble plants and almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion which to recure we heartily solicit your gracious self to take on you the charge and kingly government of this your land not as protector steward substitute or lowly factor for anothers gain but as successively from blood to blood your right of birth your empery your own. for this consorted with the citizens your very worshipful and loving friends and by their vehement instigation in this just suit come i to move your grace.$richard i cannot tell if to depart in silence or bitterly to speak in your reproof best fitteth my degree or your condition. if not to answer you might haply think tonguetied ambition not replying yielded to bear the golden yoke of sovereignty which fondly you would here impose on me. if to reprove you for this suit of yours so seasoned with your faithful love to me then on the other side i checked my friends. therefore to speak and to avoid the first and then in speaking not to incur the last definitively thus i answer you your love deserves my thanks but my desert unmeritable shuns your high request. first if all obstacles were cut away and that my path were even to the crown as the ripe revenue and due of birth yet so much is my poverty of spirit so mighty and so many my defects that i would rather hide me from my greatness being a bark to brook no mighty sea than in my greatness covet to be hid and in the vapor of my glory smothered. but god be thanked there is no need of me and much i need to help you were there need. the royal tree hath left us royal fruit which mellowed by the stealing hours of time will well become the seat of majesty and make no doubt us happy by his reign. on him i lay what you would lay on me the right and fortune of his happy stars which god defend that i should wring from him.$original text$buckingham my lord this argues conscience in your grace but the respects thereof are nice and trivial all circumstances well considered. you say that edward is your brothers son so say we too but not by edwards wife. for first was he contract to lady lucy your mother lives a witness to that vow and afterward by substitute betrothed to bona sister to the king of france. these both put off a poor petitioner a carecrazed mother to a many sons a beautywaning and distressed widow even in the afternoon of her best days made prize and purchase of his wanton eye seduced the pitch and height of his degree to base declension and loathed bigamy. by her in his unlawful bed he got this edward whom our manners term the prince. more bitterly could i expostulate save that for reverence to some alive i give a sparing limit to my tongue. then good my lord take to your royal self this proffered benefit of dignity if not to bless us and the land withal yet to draw forth your noble ancestry from the corruption of abusing times unto a lineal truederived course.$original text$lord mayor do good my lord. your citizens entreat you.$buckingham refuse not mighty lord this proffered love.$catesby o make them joyful. grant their lawful suit.$richard alas why would you heap this care on me i am unfit for state and majesty. i do beseech you take it not amiss i cannot nor i will not yield to you.$buckingham if you refuse it as in love and zeal loath to depose the child your brothers son as well we know your tenderness of heart and gentle kind effeminate remorse which we have noted in you to your kindred and equally indeed to all estates yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no your brothers son shall never reign our king but we will plant some other in the throne to the disgrace and downfall of your house. and in this resolution here we leave you. come citizens. zounds ill entreat no more.$original text$richard o do not swear my lord of buckingham$exit buckingham and some others$catesby call them again sweet prince. accept their suit. if you deny them all the land will rue it.$richard will you enforce me to a world of cares call them again. i am not made of stones but penetrable to your kind entreaties albeit against my conscience and my soul.$enter buckingham and the rest$cousin of buckingham and sage grave men since you will buckle fortune on my back to bear her burden whe'er i will or no i must have patience to endure the load but if black scandal or foulfaced reproach attend the sequel of your imposition your mere enforcement shall acquittance me from all the impure blots and stains thereof for god doth know and you may partly see how far i am from the desire of this.$lord mayor god bless your grace we see it and will say it.$richard in saying so you shall but say the truth.$original text$buckingham then i salute you with this royal title long live richard englands worthy king$all amen.$buckingham tomorrow will it please you to be crowned$richard even when you please since you will have it so.$buckingham tomorrow then we will attend your grace and so most joyfully we take our leave.$richard  to the bishops come let us to our holy task again. farewell my cousin. farewell gentle friends.$exeunt$original text$enter queen elizabeth duchess of york and dorset at one door anne duchess of gloucester with clarences young daughter at another door$duchess who meets us here my niece plantagenet led in the hand of her kind aunt of gloucester now for my life shes wandering to the tower on pure hearts love to greet the tender prince. daughter well met.$anne god give your graces both a happy and a joyful time of day.$queen elizabeth as much to you good sister. whither away$anne no farther than the tower and as i guess upon the like devotion as yourselves to gratulate the gentle princes there.$queen elizabeth kind sister thanks. well enter all together.$enter brakenbury$and in good time here the lieutenant comes. master lieutenant pray you by your leave how doth the prince and my young son of york$brakenbury right well dear madam. by your patience i may not suffer you to visit them. the king hath strictly charged the contrary.$original text$queen elizabeth the king whos that$brakenbury i mean the lord protector.$queen elizabeth the lord protect him from that kingly title hath he set bounds between their love and me i am their mother. who shall bar me from them$duchess i am their fathers mother. i will see them.$anne their aunt i am in law in love their mother. then bring me to their sights. ill bear thy blame and take thy office from thee on my peril.$brakenbury no madam no. i may not leave it so. i am bound by oath and therefore pardon me.$exit$enter lord stanley earl of derby$stanley let me but meet you ladies one hour hence and ill salute your grace of york as mother and reverend lookeron of two fair queens. to anne come madam you must straight to westminster there to be crowned richards royal queen.$queen elizabeth ah cut my lace asunder that my pent heart may have some scope to beat or else i swoon with this deadkilling news$anne despiteful tidings o unpleasing news$dorset to queen elizabeth be of good cheer mother. how fares your grace$original text$queen elizabeth o dorset speak not to me. get thee gone. death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels. thy mothers name is ominous to children. if thou wilt outstrip death go cross the seas and live with richmond from the reach of hell. go hie thee hie thee from this slaughterhouse lest thou increase the number of the dead and make me die the thrall of margarets curse nor mother wife nor englands counted queen.$stanley full of wise care is this your counsel madam. to dorset take all the swift advantage of the hours. you shall have letters from me to my son in your behalf to meet you on the way. be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.$duchess o illdispersing wind of misery o my accursed womb the bed of death a cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world whose unavoided eye is murderous.$stanley to anne come madam come. i in all haste was sent.$anne and i in all unwillingness will go. o would to god that the inclusive verge of golden metal that must round my brow were redhot steel to sear me to the brains anointed let me be with deadly venom and die ere men can say god save the queen.$queen elizabeth go go poor soul i envy not thy glory. to feed my humor wish thyself no harm.$original text$anne no why when he that is my husband now came to me as i followed henrys corse when scarce the blood was well washed from his hands which issued from my other angel husband and that dear saint which then i weeping followed o when i say i looked on richards face this was my wish be thou quoth i accursed for making me so young so old a widow and when thou weddst let sorrow haunt thy bed and be thy wife if any be so mad more miserable by the life of thee than thou hast made me by my dear lords death. lo ere i can repeat this curse again within so small a time my womans heart grossly grew captive to his honey words and proved the subject of mine own souls curse which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest for never yet one hour in his bed did i enjoyed the golden dew of sleep but with his timorous dreams was still awaked. besides he hates me for my father warwick and will no doubt shortly be rid of me.$queen elizabeth poor heart adieu. i pity thy complaining.$anne no more than from my soul i mourn for yours.$dorset farewell thou woeful welcomer of glory.$anne adieu poor soul that takst thy leave of it.$original text$duchess to dorset go thou to richmond and good fortune guide thee. to anne go thou to richard and good angels tend thee.  to queen elizabeth go thou to sanctuary and good thoughts possess thee. i to my grave where peace and rest lie with me. eightyodd years of sorrow have i seen and each hours joy wracked with a week of teen.$queen elizabeth stay yet look back with me unto the tower. pity you ancient stones those tender babes whom envy hath immured within your walls rough cradle for such little pretty ones. rude ragged nurse old sullen playfellow for tender princes use my babies well. so foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.$exeunt$original text$sound a sennet. enter richard in pomp buckingham catesby ratcliffe lovell a page and others$richard stand all apart. cousin of buckingham.$others move aside$buckingham my gracious sovereign.$richard give me thy hand.$here he ascendeth the throne. sound trumpets$thus high by thy advice and thy assistance is king richard seated. but shall we wear these glories for a day or shall they last and we rejoice in them$buckingham still live they and forever let them last.$richard ah buckingham now do i play the touch to try if thou be current gold indeed. young edward lives think now what i would speak.$buckingham say on my loving lord.$richard why buckingham i say i would be king$buckingham why so you are my thricerenowned lord.$richard ha am i king 'tis sobut edward lives.$buckingham true noble prince.$original text$richard o bitter consequence that edward still should live true noble prince cousin thou wast not wont to be so dull. shall i be plain i wish the bastards dead and i would have it suddenly performed. what sayest thou now speak suddenly. be brief.$buckingham your grace may do your pleasure.$richard tut tut thou art all ice thy kindness freezes. say have i thy consent that they shall die$buckingham give me some little breath some pause dear lord before i positively speak in this. i will resolve you herein presently.$exit$catesby aside to the other attendants the king is angry. see he gnaws his lip.$richard  aside i will converse with ironwitted fools and unrespective boys. none are for me that look into me with considerate eyes. highreaching buckingham grows circumspect. boy$page  coming forward my lord$richard knowst thou not any whom corrupting gold will tempt unto a close exploit of death$original text$page i know a discontented gentleman whose humble means match not his haughty spirit. gold were as good as twenty orators and will no doubt tempt him to anything.$richard what is his name$page his name my lord is tyrrel.$richard i partly know the man. go call him hither boy$exit page$aside the deeprevolving witty buckingham no more shall be the neighbor to my counsels hath he so long held out with me untired and stops he now for breath well be it so.$enter stanley$how now lord stanley whats the news$stanley know my long lord the marquess dorset as i hear is fled to richmond in the parts where he abides.$he walks aside$richard come hither catesby. rumor it abroad that anne my wife is very grievous sick. i will take order for her keeping close. inquire me out some mean poor gentleman whom i will marry straight to clarence' daughter. the boy is foolish and i fear not him. look how thou dreamst i say again give out that anne my queen is sick and like to die. about it for it stands me much upon to stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.$original text$exit catesby$aside i must be married to my brothers daughter or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. murder her brothers and then marry her uncertain way of gain. but i am in so far in blood that sin will pluck on sin. tearfalling pity dwells not in this eye.$enter page with tyrrel$is thy name tyrrel$tyrrel james tyrrel and your most obedient subject.$richard art thou indeed$tyrrel prove me my gracious sovereign.$richard darst thou resolve to kill a friend of mine$tyrrel please you. but i had rather kill two enemies.$richard why then thou hast it. two deep enemies foes to my rest and my sweet sleeps disturbers are they that i would have thee deal upon. tyrrel i mean those bastards in the tower.$tyrrel let me have open means to come to them and soon ill rid you from the fear of them.$richard thou singst sweet music. hark come hither tyrrel.$tyrrel approaches richard and kneels$go by this token. rise and lend thine ear.$original text$he whispers$there is no more but so. say it is done and i will love thee and prefer thee for it.$tyrrel i will dispatch it straight.$exit$enter buckingham$buckingham my lord i have considered in my mind the late request that you did sound me in.$richard well let that rest. dorset is fled to richmond.$buckingham i hear the news my lord.$richard stanley he is your wifes son. well look unto it.$buckingham my lord i claim the gift my due by promise for which your honor and your faith is pawned th' earldom of hereford and the movables which you promised i shall possess.$richard stanley look to your wife. if she convey letters to richmond you shall answer it.$buckingham what says your highness to my just request$original text$richard i do remember me henry the sixth did prophesy that richmond should be king when richmond was a little peevish boy. a king perhaps$buckingham my lord$richard how chance the prophet could not at that time have told me i being by that i should kill him$buckingham my lord your promise for the earldom$richard richmond when last i was at exeter the mayor in courtesy showed me the castle and called it rougemont at which name i started because a bard of ireland told me once i should not live long after i saw richmond.$buckingham my lord$richard ay whats o'clock$buckingham i am thus bold to put your grace in mind of what you promised me.$richard well but whats o'clock$buckingham upon the stroke of ten.$richard well let it strike.$buckingham why let it strike$original text$richard because that like a jack thou keepst the stroke betwixt thy begging and my meditation. i am not in the giving vein today.$buckingham why then resolve me whether you will or no.$richard thou troublest me i am not in the vein.$exeunt all but buckingham$buckingham and is it thus repays he my deep service with such deep contempt made i him king for this o let me think on hastings and be gone to brecknock while my fearful head is on$exit$original text$enter tyrrel$tyrrel the tyrannous and bloody act is done the most arch deed of piteous massacre that ever yet this land was guilty of. dighton and forrest whom i did suborn to do this piece of ruthless butchery albeit they were fleshed villains bloody dogs melted with tenderness and mild compassion wept like two children in their deaths' sad story. o thus quoth dighton lay those gentle babes. thus thus quoth forrest girdling one another within their alabaster innocent arms. their lips were four red roses on a stalk and in their summer beauty kissed each other. a book of prayers on their pillow lay which once quoth forrest almost changed my mind but o the devilthere the villain stopped when dighton thus told on we smothered the most replenished sweet work of nature that from the prime creation e'er she framed. hence both are gone with conscience and remorse they could not speak and so i left them both to bear this tidings to the bloody king.$enter richard$and here he comes.all health my sovereign lord.$richard kind tyrrel am i happy in thy news$original text$tyrrel if to have done the thing you gave in charge beget your happiness be happy then for it is done.$richard but didst thou see them dead$tyrrel i did my lord.$richard and buried gentle tyrrel$tyrrel the chaplain of the tower hath buried them but where to say the truth i do not know.$richard come to me tyrrel soon at aftersupper when thou shalt tell the process of their death. meantime but think how i may do thee good and be inheritor of thy desire. farewell till then.$tyrrel i humbly take my leave.$exit tyrrel$richard the son of clarence have i pent up close his daughter meanly have i matched in marriage the sons of edward sleep in abrahams bosom and anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight. now for i know the breton richmond aims at young elizabeth my brothers daughter and by that knot looks proudly on the crown to her go i a jolly thriving wooer.$enter ratcliffe$original text$ratcliffe my lord$richard good or bad news that thou comst in so bluntly$ratcliffe bad news my lord. morton is fled to richmond and buckingham backed with the hardy welshmen is in the field and still his power increaseth.$richard ely with richmond troubles me more near than buckingham and his rashlevied strength. come i have learned that fearful commenting is leaden servitor to dull delay delay leads impotent and snailpaced beggary then fiery expedition be my wing joves mercury and herald for a king. go muster men. my counsel is my shield. we must be brief when traitors brave the field.$exeunt$original text$enter old queen margaret$queen margaret so now prosperity begins to mellow and drop into the rotten mouth of death. here in these confines slyly have i lurked to watch the waning of mine enemies. a dire induction am i witness to and will to france hoping the consequence will prove as bitter black and tragical. withdraw thee wretched margaret. who comes here$she steps aside$enter queen elizabeth and the duchess of york$queen elizabeth ah my poor princes ah my tender babes my unblown flowers newappearing sweets if yet your gentle souls fly in the air and be not fixed in doom perpetual hover about me with your airy wings and hear your mothers lamentation.$queen margaret hover about her say that right for right hath dimmed your infant morn to aged night.$duchess so many miseries have crazed my voice that my woewearied tongue is still and mute. edward plantagenet why art thou dead$queen margaret  aside plantagenet doth quit plantagenet edward for edward pays a dying debt.$original text$queen elizabeth wilt thou o god fly from such gentle lambs and throw them in the entrails of the wolf when didst thou sleep when such a deed was done$queen margaret  aside when holy harry died and my sweet son.$duchess sitting down dead life blind sight poor mortal living ghost woes scene worlds shame graves due by life usurped brief abstract and record of tedious days rest thy unrest on englands lawful earth unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.$queen elizabeth sitting down beside her ah that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave as thou canst yield a melancholy seat then would i hide my bones not rest them here. o who hath any cause to mourn but we$queen margaret joining them if ancient sorrow be most reverend give mine the benefit of seigniory and let my griefs frown on the upper hand. if sorrow can admit society tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine. i had an edward till a richard killed him i had a husband till a richard killed him. thou hadst an edward till a richard killed him thou hadst a richard till a richard killed him.$duchess i had a richard too and thou didst kill him i had a rutland too thou holpst to kill him.$original text$queen margaret thou hadst a clarence too and richard killed him then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept a hellhound that doth hunt us all to death that dog that had his teeth before his eyes to worry lambs and lap their gentle blood that excellent grand tyrant of the earth that reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls that foul defacer of gods handiwork thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves. o upright just and truedisposing god how do i thank thee that this carnal cur preys on the issue of his mothers body and makes her pewfellow with others' moan$duchess o harrys wife triumph not in my woes god witness with me i have wept for thine.$queen margaret bear with me i am hungry for revenge and now i cloy me with beholding it. thy edward he is dead that killed my edward thy other edward dead to quit my edward young york he is but boot because both they matched not the high perfection of my loss. thy clarence he is dead that stabbed my edward and the beholders of this frantic play th' adulterate hastings rivers vaughan grey untimely smothered in their dusky graves. richard yet lives hells black intelligencer only reserved their factor to buy souls and send them thither. but at hand at hand ensues his piteous and unpitied end. earth gapes hell burns fiends roar saints pray to have him suddenly conveyed from hence. cancel his bond of life dear god i pray that i may live to say the dog is dead.$original text$queen elizabeth o thou didst prophesy the time would come that i should wish for thee to help me curse that bottled spider that foul bunchbacked toad$queen margaret i called thee then vain flourish of my fortune. i called thee then poor shadow painted queen the presentation of but what i was the flattering index of a direful pageant one heaved ahigh to be hurled down below a mother only mocked with two fair babes a dream of what thou wast a garish flag to be the aim of every dangerous shot a sign of dignity a breath a bubble a queen in jest only to fill the scene. where is thy husband now where be thy brothers where are thy two sons wherein dost thou joy who sues and kneels and says god save the queen where be the bending peers that flattered thee where be the thronging troops that followed thee decline all this and see what now thou art for happy wife a most distressed widow for joyful mother one that wails the name for queen a very caitiff crowned with care for she that scorned at me now scorned of me for she being feared of all now fearing one for she commanding all obeyed of none. thus hath the course of justice whirled about and left thee but a very prey to time having no more but thought of what thou wast to torture thee the more being what thou art. thou didst usurp my place and dost thou not usurp the just proportion of my sorrow now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke from which even here i slip my weary head and leave the burthen of it all on thee. farewell yorks wife and queen of sad mischance. these english woes will make me smile in france.$original text$queen elizabeth o thou wellskilled in curses stay awhile and teach me how to curse mine enemies.$queen margaret forbear to sleep the nights and fast the days compare dead happiness with living woe think that thy babes were sweeter than they were and he that slew them fouler than he is. bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse. revolving this will teach thee how to curse.$queen elizabeth my words are dull. o quicken them with thine$queen margaret thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.$exit$duchess why should calamity be full of words$queen elizabeth windy attorneys to their clients' woes airy succeeders of intestate joys poor breathing orators of miseries let them have scope though what they will impart help nothing else yet do they ease the heart.$duchess if so then be not tonguetied. go with me and in the breath of bitter words lets smother my damned son that thy two sweet sons smothered.$a trumpet sounds$the trumpet sounds. be copious in exclaims.$original text$they rise$enter king richard and his train including catesby$richard who intercepts my expedition$duchess o she that might have intercepted thee by strangling thee in her accursed womb from all the slaughters wretch that thou hast done.$queen elizabeth hidst thou that forehead with a golden crown where should be branded if that right were right the slaughter of the prince that owed that crown and the dire death of my poor sons and brothers tell me thou villainslave where are my children$duchess thou toad thou toad where is thy brother clarence and little ned plantagenet his son$queen elizabeth where is gentle rivers vaughan grey$duchess where is kind hastings$richard a flourish trumpets strike alarum drums let not the heavens hear these telltale women rail on the lords anointed. strike i say$flourish. alarums$either be patient and entreat me fair or with the clamorous report of war thus will i drown your exclamations.$duchess art thou my son$original text$richard ay i thank god my father and yourself.$duchess then patiently hear my impatience.$richard madam i have a touch of your condition which cannot brook the accent of reproof.$duchess o let me speak$richard do then but ill not hear.$duchess i will be mild and gentle in my words.$richard and brief good mother for i am in haste.$duchess art thou so hasty i have stayed for thee god knows in torment and in agony.$richard and came i not at last to comfort you$duchess no by the holy rood thou knowst it well. thou camst on earth to make the earth my hell. a grievous burden was thy birth to me tetchy and wayward was thy infancy thy school days frightful desp'rate wild and furious thy prime of manhood daring bold and venturous thy age confirmed proud subtle sly and bloody more mild but yet more harmful kind in hatred. what comfortable hour canst thou name that ever graced me in thy company$original text$richard faith none but humfrey hower that called your grace to breakfast once forth of my company. if i be so disgracious in your eye let me march on and not offend you madam. strike up the drum.$duchess i prithee hear me speak.$richard you speak too bitterly.$duchess hear me a word for i shall never speak to thee again.$richard so.$duchess either thou wilt die by gods just ordinance ere from this war thou turn a conqueror or i with grief and extreme age shall perish and nevermore behold thy face again. therefore take with thee my most grievous curse which in the day of battle tire thee more than all the complete armor that thou wearst. my prayers on the adverse party fight and there the little souls of edwards children whisper the spirits of thine enemies and promise them success and victory. bloody thou art bloody will be thy end. shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.$original text$exit$queen elizabeth though far more cause yet much less spirit to curse abides in me. i say amen to her.$richard stay madam. i must talk a word with you.$queen elizabeth i have no more sons of the royal blood for thee to slaughter. for my daughters richard they shall be praying nuns not weeping queens and therefore level not to hit their lives.$richard you have a daughter called elizabeth virtuous and fair royal and gracious.$queen elizabeth and must she die for this o let her live and ill corrupt her manners stain her beauty slander myself as false to edwards bed throw over her the veil of infamy. so she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter i will confess she was not edwards daughter.$richard wrong not her birth. she is a royal princess.$queen elizabeth to save her life ill say she is not so.$richard her life is safest only in her birth.$queen elizabeth and only in that safety died her brothers.$richard lo at their births good stars were opposite.$queen elizabeth no to their lives ill friends were contrary.$richard all unavoided is the doom of destiny.$original text$queen elizabeth true when avoided grace makes destiny. my babes were destined to a fairer death if grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.$richard you speak as if that i had slain my cousins.$queen elizabeth cousins indeed and by their uncle cozened of comfort kingdom kindred freedom life. whose hand soever launched their tender hearts thy head all indirectly gave direction. no doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt till it was whetted on thy stonehard heart to revel in the entrails of my lambs. but that still use of grief makes wild grief tame my tongue should to thy ears not name my boys till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes and i in such a desp'rate bay of death like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.$richard madam so thrive i in my enterprise and dangerous success of bloody wars as i intend more good to you and yours than ever you or yours were by me harmed$queen elizabeth what good is covered with the face of heaven to be discovered that can do me good$richard the advancement of your children gentle lady.$queen elizabeth up to some scaffold there to lose their heads.$richard unto the dignity and height of fortune the high imperial type of this earths glory.$original text$queen elizabeth flatter my sorrow with report of it. tell me what state what dignity what honor canst thou demise to any child of mine$richard even all i have ay and myself and all will i withal endow a child of thine so in the lethe of thy angry soul thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs which thou supposest i have done to thee.$queen elizabeth be brief lest that the process of thy kindness last longer telling than thy kindness' date.$richard then know that from my soul i love thy daughter.$queen elizabeth my daughters mother thinks it with her soul.$richard what do you think$queen elizabeth that thou dost love my daughter from thy soul. so from thy souls love didst thou love her brothers and from my hearts love i do thank thee for it.$richard be not so hasty to confound my meaning. i mean that with my soul i love thy daughter and do intend to make her queen of england.$queen elizabeth well then who dost thou mean shall be her king$richard even he that makes her queen. who else should be$queen elizabeth what thou$richard even so. how think you of it$original text$queen elizabeth how canst thou woo her$richard that would i learn of you as one being best acquainted with her humor.$queen elizabeth and wilt thou learn of me$richard madam with all my heart.$queen elizabeth send to her by the man that slew her brothers a pair of bleeding hearts thereon engrave edward and york. then haply she will weep. therefore present to heras sometime margaret did to thy father steeped in rutlands blood a handkerchief which say to her did drain the purple sap from her sweet brothers body and bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal. if this inducement move her not to love send her a letter of thy noble deeds tell her thou madst away her uncle clarence her uncle rivers ay and for her sake madst quick conveyance with her good aunt anne.$richard you mock me madam. this is not the way to win your daughter.$queen elizabeth there is no other way unless thou couldst put on some other shape and not be richard that hath done all this.$richard say that i did all this for love of her.$queen elizabeth nay then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee having bought love with such a bloody spoil.$original text$richard look what is done cannot be now amended. men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes which afterhours give leisure to repent. if i did take the kingdom from your sons to make amends ill give it to your daughter. if i have killed the issue of your womb to quicken your increase i will beget mine issue of your blood upon your daughter. a grandams name is little less in love than is the doting title of a mother. they are as children but one step below even of your metal of your very blood of all one pain save for a night of groans endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow. your children were vexation to your youth but mine shall be a comfort to your age. the loss you have is but a son being king and by that loss your daughter is made queen. i cannot make you what amends i would therefore accept such kindness as i can. dorset your son that with a fearful soul leads discontented steps in foreign soil this fair alliance quickly shall call home to high promotions and great dignity. the king that calls your beauteous daughter wife familiarly shall call thy dorset brother. again shall you be mother to a king and all the ruins of distressful times repaired with double riches of content. what we have many goodly days to see the liquid drops of tears that you have shed shall come again transformed to orient pearl advantaging their love with interest of ten times double gain of happiness. go then my mother to thy daughter go.$original text$make bold her bashful years with your experience prepare her ears to hear a wooers tale put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame of golden sovereignty acquaint the princess with the sweet silent hours of marriage joys and when this arm of mine hath chastised the petty rebel dullbrained buckingham bound with triumphant garlands will i come and lead thy daughter to a conquerors bed to whom i will retail my conquest won and she shall be sole victoress caesars caesar.$queen elizabeth what were i best to say her fathers brother would be her lord or shall i say her uncle or he that slew her brothers and her uncles under what title shall i woo for thee that god the law my honor and her love can make seem pleasing to her tender years$richard infer fair englands peace by this alliance.$queen elizabeth which she shall purchase with stilllasting war.$richard tell her the king that may command entreats$queen elizabeth that at her hands which the kings king forbids.$richard say she shall be a high and mighty queen.$queen elizabeth to vail the title as her mother doth.$richard say i will love her everlastingly.$original text$queen elizabeth but how long shall that title ever last$richard sweetly in force unto her fair lifes end.$queen elizabeth but how long fairly shall her sweet life last$richard as long as heaven and nature lengthens it.$queen elizabeth as long as hell and richard likes of it.$richard say i her sovereign am her subject low.$queen elizabeth but she your subject loathes such sovereignty.$richard be eloquent in my behalf to her.$queen elizabeth an honest tale speeds best being plainly told.$richard then plainly to her tell my loving tale.$queen elizabeth plain and not honest is too harsh a style.$richard your reasons are too shallow and too quick.$queen elizabeth o no my reasons are too deep and dead too deep and dead poor infants in their graves.$richard harp not on that string madam that is past.$queen elizabeth harp on it still shall i till heartstrings break.$richard now by my george my garter and my crown$queen elizabeth profaned dishonored and the third usurped.$original text$richard i swear$queen elizabeth by nothing for this is no oath. thy george profaned hath lost his lordly honor thy garter blemished pawned his knightly virtue thy crown usurped disgraced his kingly glory. if something thou wouldst swear to be believed swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.$richard then by myself$queen elizabeth thyself is selfmisused.$richard now by the world$queen elizabeth 'tis full of thy foul wrongs.$richard my fathers death$queen elizabeth thy life hath it dishonored.$richard why then by god.$queen elizabeth gods wrong is most of all. if thou didst fear to break an oath by him the unity the king my husband made thou hadst not broken nor my brothers died. if thou hadst feared to break an oath by him th' imperial metal circling now thy head had graced the tender temples of my child and both the princes had been breathing here which now two tender bedfellows for dust thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms. what canst thou swear by now$original text$richard the time to come.$queen elizabeth that thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast for i myself have many tears to wash hereafter time for time past wronged by thee. the children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered ungoverned youth to wail it in their age the parents live whose children thou hast butchered old barren plants to wail it with their age. swear not by time to come for that thou hast misused ere used by times illused o'erpast.$richard as i intend to prosper and repent so thrive i in my dangerous affairs of hostile arms myself myself confound heaven and fortune bar me happy hours day yield me not thy light nor night thy rest be opposite all planets of good luck to my proceedings if with dear hearts love immaculate devotion holy thoughts i tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. in her consists my happiness and thine. without her follows to myself and thee herself the land and many a christian soul death desolation ruin and decay. it cannot be avoided but by this it will not be avoided but by this. therefore dear motheri must call you so be the attorney of my love to her plead what i will be not what i have been not my deserts but what i will deserve. urge the necessity and state of times and be not peevish found in great designs.$original text$queen elizabeth shall i be tempted of the devil thus$richard ay if the devil tempt you to do good.$queen elizabeth shall i forget myself to be myself$richard ay if your selfs remembrance wrong yourself.$queen elizabeth yet thou didst kill my children.$richard but in your daughters womb i bury them where in that nest of spicery they will breed selves of themselves to your recomforture.$queen elizabeth shall i go win my daughter to thy will$richard and be a happy mother by the deed.$queen elizabeth i go. write to me very shortly and you shall understand from me her mind.$richard bear her my true loves kiss and so farewell.$exit queen elizabeth$relenting fool and shallow changing woman$enter ratcliffe with catesby behind$how now what news$original text$ratcliffe most mighty sovereign on the western coast rideth a puissant navy. to our shores throng many doubtful hollowhearted friends unarmed and unresolved to beat them back. 'tis thought that richmond is their admiral and there they hull expecting but the aid of buckingham to welcome them ashore.$richard some lightfoot friend post to the duke of norfolk ratcliffe thyself or catesby. where is he$catesby here my good lord.$richard catesby fly to the duke.$catesby i will my lord with all convenient haste.$richard ratcliffe come hither. post to salisbury. when thou comst thither  to catesby dull unmindful villain why stayst thou here and gost not to the duke$catesby first mighty liege tell me your highness' pleasure what from your grace i shall deliver to him.$richard o true good catesby. bid him levy straight the greatest strength and power that he can make and meet me suddenly at salisbury.$catesby i go.$exit$original text$ratcliffe what may it please you shall i do at salisbury$richard why what wouldst thou do there before i go$ratcliffe your highness told me i should post before.$richard my mind is changed.$enter stanley$stanley what news with you$stanley none good my liege to please you with the hearing nor none so bad but well may be reported.$richard hoyday a riddle neither good nor bad. what needst thou run so many mile about when thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way once more what news$stanley richmond is on the seas.$richard there let him sink and be the seas on him whitelivered runagate what doth he there$stanley i know not mighty sovereign but by guess.$richard well as you guess$stanley stirred up by dorset buckingham and morton he makes for england here to claim the crown.$original text$richard is the chair empty is the sword unswayed is the king dead the empire unpossessed what heir of york is there alive but we and who is englands king but great yorks heir then tell me what makes he upon the seas$stanley unless for that my liege i cannot guess.$richard unless for that he comes to be your liege you cannot guess wherefore the welshman comes. thou wilt revolt and fly to him i fear.$stanley no my good lord. therefore mistrust me not.$richard where is thy power then to beat him back where be thy tenants and thy followers are they not now upon the western shore safeconducting the rebels from their ships$stanley no my good lord. my friends are in the north.$richard cold friends to me. what do they in the north when they should serve their sovereign in the west$stanley they have not been commanded mighty king. pleaseth your majesty to give me leave ill muster up my friends and meet your grace where and what time your majesty shall please.$richard ay thou wouldst be gone to join with richmond but ill not trust thee.$original text$stanley most mighty sovereign you have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful. i never was nor never will be false.$richard go then and muster men but leave behind your son george stanley. look your heart be firm. or else his heads assurance is but frail.$stanley so deal with him as i prove true to you.$exit$enter a messenger$messenger my gracious sovereign now in devonshire as i by friends am well advertised sir edward courtney and the haughty prelate bishop of exeter his elder brother with many more confederates are in arms.$enter second messenger$second messenger in kent my liege the guilfords are in arms and every hour more competitors flock to the rebels and their power grows strong.$enter third messenger$third messenger my lord the army of great buckingham$richard out on you owls nothing but songs of death. he striketh him there take thou that till thou bring better news.$original text$third messenger the news i have to tell your majesty is that by sudden floods and fall of waters buckinghams army is dispersed and scattered and he himself wandered away alone no man knows whither.$richard i cry thee mercy. there is my purse to cure that blow of thine. he gives money hath any welladvised friend proclaimed reward to him that brings the traitor in$third messenger such proclamation hath been made my lord.$enter fourth messenger$fourth messenger sir thomas lovell and lord marquess dorset 'tis said my liege in yorkshire are in arms. but this good comfort bring i to your highness the breton navy is dispersed by tempest. richmond in dorsetshire sent out a boat unto the shore to ask those on the banks if they were his assistants yea or no who answered him they came from buckingham upon his party. he mistrusting them hoisted sail and made his course for brittany.$richard march on march on since we are up in arms if not to fight with foreign enemies yet to beat down these rebels here at home.$enter catesby$original text$catesby my liege the duke of buckingham is taken. that is the best news. that the earl of richmond is with a mighty power landed at milford is colder tidings yet they must be told.$richard away towards salisbury while we reason here a royal battle might be won and lost. someone take order buckingham be brought to salisbury. the rest march on with me.$$flourish. exeunt$original text$enter stanley and sir christopher.$stanley sir christopher tell richmond this from me that in the sty of the most deadly boar my son george stanley is franked up in hold if i revolt off goes young georges head the fear of that holds off my present aid. so get three gone. commend me to thy lord. withal say that the queen hath heartily consented he should espouse elizabeth her daughter. but tell me where is princely richmond now$christopher at pembroke or at ha'rfordwest in wales.$stanley what men of name resort to him$christopher sir walter herbert a renowned soldier sir gilbert talbot sir william stanley oxford redoubted pembroke sir james blunt and rice ap thomas with a valiant crew and many other of great name and worth and towards london they do bend their power if by the way they be not fought withal.$stanley gives him a paper well hie thee to thy lord. i kiss his hand. my letter will resolve him of my mind. farewell.$exeunt$original text$enter buckingham with sheriff and halberds led to execution$buckingham will not king richard let me speak with him$sheriff no my good lord. therefore be patient.$buckingham hastings and edwards children grey and rivers holy king henry and thy fair son edward vaughan and all that have miscarried by underhand corrupted foul injustice if that your moody discontented souls do through the clouds behold this present hour even for revenge mock my destruction. this is all souls' day fellow is it not$sheriff it is.$buckingham why then all souls' day is my bodys doomsday. this is the day which in king edwards time i wished might fall on me when i was found false to his children and his wifes allies. this is the day wherein i wished to fall by the false faith of him who most i trusted. this this all souls' day to my fearful soul is the determined respite of my wrongs. that high allseer which i dallied with hath turned my feigned prayer on my head and given in earnest what i begged in jest.$original text$thus doth he force the swords of wicked men to turn their own points in their masters' bosoms. thus margarets curse falls heavy upon my neck when he quoth she shall split thy heart with sorrow remember margaret was a prophetess. come lead me officers to the block of shame. wrong hath but wrong and blame the due of blame.$exeunt$original text$enter richmond oxford blunt herbert and others with drum and colors$richmond fellows in arms and my most loving friends bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny have we marched on without impediment thus far into the bowels of the land and here receive we from our father stanley lines of fair comfort and encouragement. the wretched bloody and usurping boar that spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines swills your warm blood like wash and makes his trough in your embowelled bosomsthis foul swine is now even in the center of this isle near to the town of leicester as we learn. from tamworth thither is but one days march. in gods name cheerly on courageous friends to reap the harvest of perpetual peace by this one bloody trial of sharp war.$oxford every mans conscience is a thousand men to fight against this guilty homicide.$herbert i doubt not but his friends will turn to us.$blunt he hath no friends but who are friends for fear. which in his dearest need will fly from him.$richmond all for our vantage. then in gods name march. true hope is swift and flies with swallows wings. kings it makes gods and meaner creatures kings.$exeunt$original text$enter richard in arms with norfolk ratcliffe surrey and soldiers$richard here pitch our tent even here in bosworth field. my lord of surrey why look you so sad$surrey my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.$richard my lord of norfolk$norfolk here most gracious liege.$richard norfolk we must have knocks ha must we not$norfolk we must both give and take my loving lord.$richard up with my tenthere will i lie tonight. but where tomorrow well alls one for that. who hath descried the number of the traitors$norfolk six or seven thousand is their utmost power.$richard why our battalia trebles that account. besides the kings name is a tower of strength which they upon the adverse party want. up with the tentcome noble gentlemen let us survey the vantage of the ground. call for some men of sound direction. lets lack no discipline make no delay for lords tomorrow is a busy day.$exeunt$original text$enter richmond sir william brandon oxford dorset herbert blunt and others. some of the soldiers pitch richmonds tent$richmond the weary sun hath made a golden set and by the bright track of his fiery car gives token of a goodly day tomorrow. sir william brandon you shall bear my standard. give me some ink and paper in my tent ill draw the form and model of our battle limit each leader to his several charge and part in just proportion our small power. my lord of oxford you sir william brandon and you sir walter herbert stay with me. the earl of pembroke keeps his regiment good captain blunt bear my goodnight to him and by the second hour in the morning desire the earl to see me in my tent. yet one thing more good captain do for me. where is lord stanley quartered do you know$blunt unless i have mista'en his colors much which well i am assured i have not done his regiment lies half a mile at least south from the mighty power of the king.$richmond if without peril it be possible sweet blunt make some good means to speak with him and give him from me this most needful note.$he hands him a paper$blunt upon my life my lord ill undertake it. and so god give you quiet rest tonight$original text$richmond good night good captain blunt.$blunt exits$come gentlemen let us consult upon tomorrows business into my tent. the dew is raw and cold.$enter to his tent richard norfolk ratcliffe catesby and others$richard what is t oclock$catesby its suppertime my lord. its nine o'clock.$richard i will not sup tonight. give me some ink and paper. what is my beaver easier than it was and all my armor laid into my tent$catesby it is my liege and all things are in readiness.$richard good norfolk hie thee to thy charge. use careful watch. choose trusty sentinels.$norfolk i go my lord.$richard stir with the lark tomorrow gentle norfolk.$norfolk i warrant you my lord.$exit$richard catesby.$original text$catesby my lord.$richard send out a pursuivantatarms to stanleys regiment. bid him bring his power before sunrising lest his son george fall into the blind cave of eternal night.$exit catesby$to soldiers fill me a bowl of wine. give me a watch. saddle white surrey for the field tomorrow. look that my staves be sound and not too heavy. ratcliffe.$ratcliffe my lord.$richard sawst thou the melancholy lord northumberland$ratcliffe thomas the earl of surrey and himself much about cockshut time from troop to troop went through the army cheering up the soldiers.$richard so i am satisfied. give me a bowl of wine. i have not that alacrity of spirit nor cheer of mind that i was wont to have. set it down. is ink and paper ready$ratcliffe it is my lord.$richard bid my guard watch. leave me. ratcliffe about the mid of night come to my tent and help to arm me. leave me i say.$exeunt ratcliffe and the other attendants. richard sleeps.$original text$enter stanley to richmond in his tent lords and others attending$stanley fortune and victory sit on thy helm$richmond all comfort that the dark night can afford be to thy person noble fatherinlaw. tell me how fares our loving mother$stanley i by attorney bless thee from thy mother who prays continually for richmonds good. so much for that. the silent hours steal on and flaky darkness breaks within the east. in brief for so the season bids us be prepare thy battle early in the morning and put thy fortune to the arbitrament of bloody strokes and mortalstaring war. i as i maythat which i would i cannot with best advantage will deceive the time and aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms. but on thy side i may not be too forward lest being seen thy brother tender george be executed in his fathers sight. farewell. the leisure and the fearful time cuts off the ceremonious vows of love and ample interchange of sweet discourse which solongsundered friends should dwell upon. god give us leisure for these rites of love once more adieu. be valiant and speed well.$richmond good lords conduct him to his regiment ill strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow when i should mount with wings of victory. once more good night kind lords and gentlemen.$original text$exeunt all but richmond$o thou whose captain i account myself look on my forces with a gracious eye. put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath that they may crush down with a heavy fall the usurping helmets of our adversaries make us thy ministers of chastisement that we may praise thee in the victory to thee i do commend my watchful soul ere i let fall the windows of mine eyes. sleeping and waking o defend me still sleeps$enter the ghost of prince edward son to king henry vi$ghost of prince edward to richard let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow think how thou stabbedst me in my prime of youth at tewkesbury. despair therefore and die to richmond be cheerful richmond for the wronged souls of butchered princes fight in thy behalf. king henrys issue richmond comforts thee.$exit$enter the ghost of king henry vi$ghost of king henry vi  to richard when i was mortal my anointed body by thee was punched full of deadly holes. think on the tower and me. despair and die harry the sixth bids thee despair and die. to richmond virtuous and holy be thou conqueror. harry that prophesied thou shouldst be king doth comfort thee in thy sleep. live and flourish.$exit$original text$enter the ghost of clarence$ghost of clarence to richard let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow i that was washed to death with fulsome wine poor clarence by thy guile betrayed to death. tomorrow in the battle think on me and fall thy edgeless sword. despair and die to richmond thou offspring of the house of lancaster the wronged heirs of york do pray for thee good angels guard thy battle. live and flourish.$exit$enter the ghosts of rivers gray and vaughan$ghost of rivers to richard let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow rivers that died at pomfret. despair and die$ghost of grey to richard think upon grey and let thy soul despair$ghost of vaughan to richard think upon vaughan and with guilty fear let fall thy lance. despair and die$all to richmond awake and think our wrongs in richards bosom will conquer him awake and win the day.$exeunt$enter the ghosts of the two young princes$original text$ghosts of princes  to richard dream on thy cousins smothered in the tower. let us be lead within thy bosom richard and weigh thee down to ruin shame and death. thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.  to richmond sleep richmond sleep in peace and wake in joy. good angels guard thee from the boars annoy. live and beget a happy race of kings. edwards unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.$exeunt$enter the ghost of hastings$ghost of hastings  to richard bloody and guilty guiltily awake and in a bloody battle end thy days. think on lord hastings. despair and die to richmond quiet untroubled soul awake awake. arm fight and conquer for fair englands sake.$$enter the ghost of anne$ghost of anne  to richard richard thy wife that wretched anne thy wife that never slept a quiet hour with thee now fills thy sleep with perturbations. tomorrow in the battle think on me and fall thy edgeless sword despair and die to richmond thou quiet soul sleep thou a quiet sleep. dream of success and happy victory. thy adversarys wife doth pray for thee.$exit$original text$enter the ghost of buckingham$ghost of buckingham to richard the last was i that helped thee to the crown the last was i that felt thy tyranny. o in the battle think on buckingham and die in terror of thy guiltiness. dream on dream on of bloody deeds and death. fainting despair despairing yield thy breath.  to richmond i died for hope ere i could lend thee aid but cheer thy heart and be thou not dismayed. god and good angels fight on richmonds side and richard fall in height of all his pride.$exit$richard starts out of his dream$richard give me another horse bind up my wounds have mercy jesusoft i did but dream. o coward conscience how dost thou afflict me the lights burn blue. it is now dead midnight. cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh. what do i fear myself theres none else by. richard loves richard that is i and i. is there a murderer here no. yes i am. then fly what from myself great reason why lest i revenge. what myself upon myself alack i love myself. wherefore for any good that i myself have done unto myself o no alas i rather hate myself for hateful deeds committed by myself. i am a villain. yet i lie. i am not. fool of thyself speak well. fool do not flatter.$original text$my conscience hath a thousand several tongues and every tongue brings in a several tale and every tale condemns me for a villain. perjury perjury in the highest degree murder stern murder in the direst degree all several sins all used in each degree throng to the bar crying all guilty guilty i shall despair. there is no creature loves me and if i die no soul will pity me. and wherefore should they since that i myself find in myself no pity to myself methought the souls of all that i had murdered came to my tent and every one did threat tomorrows vengeance on the head of richard.$enter ratcliffe$ratcliffe my lord.$richard zounds who is there$ratcliffe ratcliffe my lord tis i. the early village cock hath twice done salutation to the morn. your friends are up and buckle on their armor.$richard o ratcliffe i have dreamed a fearful dream what thinkst thou will our friends prove all true$ratcliffe no doubt my lord.$richard o ratcliffe i fear i fear.$ratcliffe nay good my lord be not afraid of shadows.$original text$richard by the apostle paul shadows tonight have struck more terror to the soul of richard than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers armed in proof and led by shallow richmond. 'tis not yet near day. come go with me under our tents ill play the eavesdropper to see if any mean to shrink from me.$exeunt$enter the lords to richmond sitting in his tent$lords good morrow richmond.$richmond cry mercy lords and watchful gentlemen that you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.$a lord how have you slept my lord$richmond the sweetest sleep and fairestboding dreams that ever entered in a drowsy head have i since your departure had my lords. methought their souls whose bodies richard murdered came to my tent and cried on victory. i promise you my soul is very jocund in the remembrance of so fair a dream. how far into the morning is it lords$lords upon the stroke of four.$richmond why then tis time to arm and give direction. his oration to his soldiers more than i have said loving countrymen the leisure and enforcement of the time forbids to dwell upon. yet remember this$original text$god and our good cause fight upon our side. the prayers of holy saints and wronged souls like highreared bulwarks stand before our faces. richard except those whom we fight against had rather have us win than him they follow. for what is he they follow truly gentlemen a bloody tyrant and a homicide one raised in blood and one in blood established one that made means to come by what he hath and slaughtered those that were the means to help him a base foul stone made precious by the foil of englands chair where he is falsely set one that hath ever been gods enemy. then if you fight against gods enemy god will in justice ward you as his soldiers. if you do sweat to put a tyrant down you sleep in peace the tyrant being slain. if you do fight against your countrys foes your countrys fat shall pay your pains the hire. if you do fight in safeguard of your wives your wives shall welcome home the conquerors. if you do free your children from the sword your childrens children quits it in your age. then in the name of god and all these rights advance your standards. draw your willing swords. for me the ransom of my bold attempt shall be this cold corpse on the earths cold face but if i thrive the gain of my attempt the least of you shall share his part thereof. sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully god and saint george richmond and victory$exeunt$original text$enter king richard ratcliffe attendants and forces$richard what said northumberland as touching richmond$ratcliffe that he was never trained up in arms.$richard he said the truth. and what said surrey then$ratcliffe he smiled and said the better for our purpose.$richard he was in the right and so indeed it is.$the clock striketh$tell the clock there. give me a calendar. he looks in an almanac who saw the sun today$ratcliffe not i my lord.$richard then he disdains to shine for by the book he should have braved the east an hour ago a black day will it be to somebody. ratcliffe$ratcliffe my lord.$richard the sun will not be seen today. the sky doth frown and lour upon our army. i would these dewy tears were from the ground. not shine today why what is that to me more than to richmond for the selfsame heaven that frowns on me looks sadly upon him.$original text$enter norfolk$norfolk arm arm my lord. the foe vaunts in the field.$richard come bustle bustle. caparison my horse. call up lord stanley bid him bring his power. i will lead forth my soldiers to the plain and thus my battle shall be ordered my foreward shall be drawn out all in length consisting equally of horse and foot our archers shall be placed in the midst. john duke of norfolk thomas earl of surrey shall have the leading of this foot and horse. they thus directed we will follow in the main battle whose puissance on either side shall be well winged with our chiefest horse. this and saint george to bootwhat thinkst thou norfolk$norfolk a good direction warlike sovereign.$he sheweth him a paper$this found i on my tent this morning.$richard reads jockey of norfolk be not so bold. for dickon thy master is bought and sold. a thing devised by the enemy. go gentlemen every man unto his charge. let not our babbling dreams affright our souls. conscience is but a word that cowards use devised at first to keep the strong in awe. our strong arms be our conscience swords our law.$original text$march on. join bravely. let us to it pell mell if not to heaven then hand in hand to hell. his oration to his army what shall i say more than i have inferred remember whom you are to cope withal a sort of vagabonds rascals and runaways a scum of bretons and base lackey peasants whom their o'ercloyed country vomits forth to desperate ventures and assured destruction. you sleeping safe they bring to you unrest you having lands and blessed with beauteous wives they would restrain the one distain the other. and who doth lead them but a paltry fellow long kept in brittany at our mothers cost a milksop one that never in his life felt so much cold as overshoes in snow lets whip these stragglers o'er the seas again lash hence these overweening rags of france these famished beggars weary of their lives who but for dreaming on this fond exploit for want of means poor rats had hanged themselves. if we be conquered let men conquer us and not these bastard bretons whom our fathers have in their own land beaten bobbed and thumped and in record left them the heirs of shame. shall these enjoy our lands lie with our wives ravish our daughters$drum afar off$hark i hear their drum. fight gentlemen of england.fight bold yeomen. draw archers draw your arrows to the head. spur your proud horses hard and ride in blood. amaze the welkin with your broken staves$original text$enter a messenger$what says lord stanley will he bring his power$messenger my lord he doth deny to come.$richard off with his son georges head$norfolk my lord the enemy is past the marsh. after the battle let george stanley die.$richard a thousand hearts are great within my bosom. advance our standards. set upon our foes. our ancient word of courage fair saint george inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons. upon them victory sits on our helms.$exeunt$original text$alarum. excursions. enter norfolk and forces fighting to him catesby$catesby rescue my lord of norfolk rescue rescue the king enacts more wonders than a man daring an opposite to every danger. his horse is slain and all on foot he fights seeking for richmond in the throat of death. rescue fair lord or else the day is lost$$alarums. enter richard$richard a horse a horse my kingdom for a horse$catesby withdraw my lord. ill help you to a horse.$richard slave i have set my life upon a cast and i will stand the hazard of the die. i think there be six richmonds in the field five have i slain today instead of him. a horse a horse my kingdom for a horse$exeunt$original text$alarum. enter richard and richmond. they fight. richard is slain. retreat and flourish. enter richmond stanley bearing the crown with divers other lords and soldiers$richmond god and your arms be praised victorious friends the day is ours the bloody dog is dead.$stanley offering him the crown courageous richmond well hast thou acquit thee. lo here this longusurped royalty from the dead temples of this bloody wretch have i plucked off to grace thy brows withal. wear it enjoy it and make much of it.$richmond great god of heaven say amen to all but tell me is young george stanley living$stanley he is my lord and safe in leicester town whither if it please you we may now withdraw us.$richmond what men of name are slain on either side$stanley john duke of norfolk walter lord ferrers sir robert brakenbury and sir william brandon.$richmond inter their bodies as becomes their births. proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled that in submission will return to us. and then as we have ta'en the sacrament we will unite the white rose and the red.$original text$smile heaven upon this fair conjunction that long have frowned upon their enmity. what traitor hears me and says not amen england hath long been mad and scarred herself. the brother blindly shed the brothers blood. the father rashly slaughtered his own son. the son compelled been butcher to the sire. all this divided york and lancaster divided in their dire division. o now let richmond and elizabeth the true succeeders of each royal house by gods fair ordinance conjoin together and let their heirs god if thy will be so. enrich the time to come with smoothfaced peace with smiling plenty and fair prosperous days abate the edge of traitors gracious lord that would reduce these bloody days again and make poor england weep in streams of blood let them not live to taste this lands increase that would with treason wound this fair lands peace. now civil wounds are stopped peace lives again. that she may long live here god say amen.$exeunt$original text$enter chorus$chorus two households both alike in dignity in fair verona where we lay our scene from ancient grudge break to new mutiny where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. from forth the fatal loins of these two foes a pair of starcrossed lovers take their life whose misadventured piteous overthrows doth with their death bury their parents' strife. the fearful passage of their deathmarked love and the continuance of their parents' rage which but their childrens end naught could remove is now the two hours' traffic of our stage the which if you with patient ears attend what here shall miss our toil shall strive to mend.$exit$original text$enter sampson and gregory of the house of capulet with swords and bucklers$sampson gregory on my word well not carry coals.$gregory no for then we should be colliers.$sampson i mean an we be in choler well draw.$gregory ay while you live draw your neck out of collar.$sampson i strike quickly being moved.$gregory but thou art not quickly moved to strike.$sampson a dog of the house of montague moves me.$gregory to move is to stir and to be valiant is to stand. therefore if thou art moved thou runnst away.$sampson a dog of that house shall move me to stand. i will take the wall of any man or maid of montagues.$original text$gregory that shows thee a weak slave for the weakest goes to the wall.$sampson 'tis true and therefore women being the weaker vessels are ever thrust to the wall. therefore i will push montagues men from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.$gregory the quarrel is between our masters and us their men.$sampson 'tis all one. i will show myself a tyrant. when i have fought with the men i will be civil with the maids. i will cut off their heads.$gregory the heads of the maids$sampson ay the heads of the maids or their maidenheads. take it in what sense thou wilt.$gregory they must take it in sense that feel it.$sampson me they shall feel while i am able to stand and tis known i am a pretty piece of flesh.$gregory 'tis well thou art not fish. if thou hadst thou hadst been poorjohn.$enter abram and another servingman$draw thy tool here comes of the house of montagues.$sampson my naked weapon is out. quarrel i will back thee.$original text$gregory how turn thy back and run$sampson fear me not.$gregory no marry. i fear thee.$sampson let us take the law of our sides. let them begin.$gregory i will frown as i pass by and let them take it as they list.$sampson nay as they dare. i will bite my thumb at them which is a disgrace to them if they bear it. bites his thumb$abram do you bite your thumb at us sir$sampson i do bite my thumb sir.$abram do you bite your thumb at us sir$sampson  aside to gregory is the law of our side if i say ay$gregory aside to sampson no.$sampson no sir. i do not bite my thumb at you sir but i bite my thumb sir.$gregory do you quarrel sir$abram quarrel sir no sir.$original text$sampson but if you do sir i am for you. i serve as good a man as you.$abram no better.$sampson well sir.$enter benvolio$gregory  aside to sampson say better. here comes one of my masters kinsmen.$sampson to abram yes better sir.$abram you lie.$sampson draw if you be men.gregory remember thy washing blow.$they fight$benvolio draws his sword part fools put up your swords. you know not what you do.$enter tybalt$tybalt what art thou drawn among these heartless hinds turn thee benvolio. look upon thy death.$original text$benvolio i do but keep the peace. put up thy sword or manage it to part these men with me.$tybalt what drawn and talk of peace i hate the word as i hate hell all montagues and thee. have at thee coward$they fight enter three or four citizens with clubs or partisans$citizens clubs bills and partisans strike beat them down down with the capulets down with the montagues$enter old capulet in his gown and his wife lady capulet$capulet what noise is this give me my long sword ho$lady capulet a crutch a crutch why call you for a sword$enter old montague and his wife lady montague$capulet my sword i say old montague is come and flourishes his blade in spite of me.$montague thou villain capulet hold me not. let me go.$lady montague thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.$original text$enter prince escalus with his train$prince rebellious subjects enemies to peace profaners of this neighborstained steel will they not hearwhat ho you men you beasts that quench the fire of your pernicious rage with purple fountains issuing from your veins on pain of torture from those bloody hands throw your mistempered weapons to the ground and hear the sentence of your moved prince. three civil brawls bred of an airy word by thee old capulet and montague have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets and made veronas ancient citizens cast by their gravebeseeming ornaments to wield old partisans in hands as old cankered with peace to part your cankered hate. if ever you disturb our streets again your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. for this time all the rest depart away. you capulet shall go along with me and montague come you this afternoon to know our farther pleasure in this case to old freetown our common judgmentplace. once more on pain of death all men depart.$exeunt all but montague lady montague and benvolio$montague who set this ancient quarrel new abroach speak nephew. were you by when it began$original text$benvolio here were the servants of your adversary and yours close fighting ere i did approach. i drew to part them. in the instant came the fiery tybalt with his sword prepared which as he breathed defiance to my ears he swung about his head and cut the winds who nothing hurt withal hissed him in scorn. while we were interchanging thrusts and blows came more and more and fought on part and part till the prince came who parted either part.$lady montague oh where is romeo saw you him today right glad i am he was not at this fray.$benvolio madam an hour before the worshipped sun peered forth the golden window of the east a troubled mind drove me to walk abroad where underneath the grove of sycamore that westward rooteth from this city side so early walking did i see your son. towards him i made but he was 'ware of me and stole into the covert of the wood. i measuring his affections by my own which then most sought where most might not be found being one too many by my weary self pursued my humor not pursuing his and gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.$montague many a morning hath he there been seen with tears augmenting the fresh mornings dew adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs. but all so soon as the allcheering sun should in the farthest east begin to draw the shady curtains from auroras bed away from light steals home my heavy son$original text$and private in his chamber pens himself shuts up his windows locks fair daylight out and makes himself an artificial night. black and portentous must this humor prove unless good counsel may the cause remove.$benvolio my noble uncle do you know the cause$montague i neither know it nor can learn of him.$benvolio have you importuned him by any means$montague both by myself and many other friends. but he his own affections' counselor is to himselfi will not say how true but to himself so secret and so close so far from sounding and discovery as is the bud bit with an envious worm ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air or dedicate his beauty to the same. could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow. we would as willingly give cure as know.$enter romeo$benvolio see where he comes. so please you step aside. ill know his grievance or be much denied.$montague i would thou wert so happy by thy stay to hear true shrift.come madam lets away.$exeunt montague and lady montague$original text$benvolio good morrow cousin.$romeo is the day so young$benvolio but new struck nine.$romeo ay me sad hours seem long. was that my father that went hence so fast$benvolio it was. what sadness lengthens romeos hours$romeo not having that which having makes them short.$benvolio in love$romeo out.$benvolio of love$romeo out of her favor where i am in love.$benvolio alas that love so gentle in his view should be so tyrannous and rough in proof$romeo alas that love whose view is muffled still should without eyes see pathways to his will where shall we dineo me what fray was here yet tell me not for i have heard it all. heres much to do with hate but more with love. why then o brawling love o loving hate o anything of nothing first created o heavy lightness serious vanity misshapen chaos of wellseeming forms feather of lead bright smoke cold fire sick health stillwaking sleep that is not what it is this love feel i that feel no love in this. dost thou not laugh$original text$benvolio no coz i rather weep.$romeo good heart at what$benvolio at thy good hearts oppression.$romeo why such is loves transgression. griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed with more of thine. this love that thou hast shown doth add more grief to too much of mine own. love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs being purged a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes being vexed a sea nourished with loving tears. what is it else a madness most discreet a choking gall and a preserving sweet. farewell my coz.$benvolio soft i will go along. and if you leave me so you do me wrong.$romeo tut i have lost myself. i am not here. this is not romeo. hes some other where.$benvolio tell me in sadness who is that you love.$romeo what shall i groan and tell thee$benvolio groan why no. but sadly tell me who.$original text$romeo a sick man in sadness makes his will a word ill urged to one that is so ill. in sadness cousin i do love a woman.$benvolio i aimed so near when i supposed you loved.$romeo a right good markman and shes fair i love.$benvolio a right fair mark fair coz is soonest hit.$romeo well in that hit you miss. shell not be hit with cupids arrow. she hath dians wit. and in strong proof of chastity well armed from loves weak childish bow she lives uncharmed. she will not stay the siege of loving terms nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes nor ope her lap to saintseducing gold. oh she is rich in beauty only poor that when she dies with beauty dies her store.$benvolio then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste$romeo she hath and in that sparing makes huge waste for beauty starved with her severity cuts beauty off from all posterity. she is too fair too wise wisely too fair to merit bliss by making me despair. she hath forsworn to love and in that vow do i live dead that live to tell it now.$benvolio be ruled by me. forget to think of her.$romeo o teach me how i should forget to think$original text$benvolio by giving liberty unto thine eyes. examine other beauties.$romeo 'tis the way to call hers exquisite in question more. these happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows being black puts us in mind they hide the fair. he that is strucken blind cannot forget the precious treasure of his eyesight lost. show me a mistress that is passing fair what doth her beauty serve but as a note where i may read who passed that passing fair farewell. thou canst not teach me to forget.$benvolio ill pay that doctrine or else die in debt.$exeunt$original text$enter capulet county paris and peter a servant$capulet but montague is bound as well as i in penalty alike. and tis not hard i think for men so old as we to keep the peace.$paris of honorable reckoning are you both. and pity tis you lived at odds so long. but now my lord what say you to my suit$capulet but saying o'er what i have said before. my child is yet a stranger in the world. she hath not seen the change of fourteen years. let two more summers wither in their pride ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.$paris younger than she are happy mothers made.$capulet and too soon marred are those so early made. earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she. shes the hopeful lady of my earth. but woo her gentle paris get her heart. my will to her consent is but a part. an she agreed within her scope of choice lies my consent and fair according voice. this night i hold an old accustomed feast whereto i have invited many a guest such as i love. and you among the store one more most welcome makes my number more. at my poor house look to behold this night earthtreading stars that make dark heaven light.$original text$such comfort as do lusty young men feel when wellappareled april on the heel of limping winter treads. even such delight among fresh fennel buds shall you this night inherit at my house. hear all all see and like her most whose merit most shall be which on more view of many mine being one may stand in number though in reckoning none come go with me.$ to peter giving him a paper go sirrah trudge about through fair verona. find those persons out whose names are written there and to them say my house and welcome on their pleasure stay.$exeunt capulet and paris$peter find them out whose names are written here it is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets. but i am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. i must to the learned in good time$enter benvolio and romeo$benvolio tut man one fire burns out anothers burning. one pain is lessened by anothers anguish. turn giddy and be helped by backward turning. one desperate grief cures with anothers languish. take thou some new infection to thy eye and the rank poison of the old will die.$original text$romeo your plantain leaf is excellent for that.$benvolio for what i pray thee$romeo for your broken shin.$benvolio why romeo art thou mad$romeo not mad but bound more than a madman is shut up in prison kept without my food whipped and tormented andgood e'en good fellow.$peter god 'i' good e'en. i pray sir can you read$romeo ay mine own fortune in my misery.$peter perhaps you have learned it without book. but i pray can you read anything you see$romeo ay if i know the letters and the language.$peter ye say honestly. rest you merry.$romeo stay fellow. i can read. he reads the letter seigneur martino and his wife and daughters county anselme and his beauteous sisters the lady widow of vitruvio seigneur placentio and his lovely nieces mercutio and his brother valentine mine uncle capulet his wife and daughters my fair niece rosaline and livia$original text$seigneur valentio and his cousin tybalt lucio and the lively helena. a fair assembly. whither should they come$peter up.$romeo whither to supper$peter to our house.$romeo whose house$peter my masters.$romeo indeed i should have asked thee that before.$peter now ill tell you without asking. my master is the great rich capulet and if you be not of the house of montagues i pray come and crush a cup of wine. rest you merry$exit peter$benvolio at this same ancient feast of capulets sups the fair rosaline whom thou so loves with all the admired beauties of verona. go thither and with unattainted eye compare her face with some that i shall show and i will make thee think thy swan a crow.$romeo when the devout religion of mine eye maintains such falsehood then turn tears to fires and these who often drowned could never die transparent heretics be burnt for liars one fairer than my love the allseeing sun ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.$original text$benvolio tut you saw her fair none else being by herself poised with herself in either eye. but in that crystal scales let there be weighed your ladys love against some other maid that i will show you shining at the feast and she shall scant show well that now shows best.$romeo ill go along no such sight to be shown but to rejoice in splendor of mine own.$exeunt$original text$enter lady capulet and nurse$lady capulet nurse wheres my daughter call her forth to me.$nurse now by my maidenhead at twelve year old i bade her come. what lamb what ladybird god forbid wheres this girl what juliet$enter juliet$juliet how now who calls$nurse your mother.$juliet madam i am here. what is your will$lady capulet this is the matter.nurse give leave awhile we must talk in secret.nurse come back again. i have remembered me. thous hear our counsel. thou knowst my daughters of a pretty age.$nurse faith i can tell her age unto an hour.$lady capulet shes not fourteen.$nurse ill lay fourteen of my teethand yet to my teen be it spoken i have but fourshe is not fourteen. how long is it now to lammastide$lady capulet a fortnight and odd days.$original text$nurse even or odd of all days in the year come lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. susan and shegod rest all christian souls were of an age. well susan is with god. she was too good for me. but as i said on lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. that shall she. marry i remember it well. 'tis since the earthquake now eleven years and she was weanedi never shall forget it of all the days of the year upon that day. for i had then laid wormwood to my dug sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall. my lord and you were then at mantua. nay i do bear a brain.but as i said when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple of my dug and felt it bitter pretty fool to see it tetchy and fall out with the dug shake quoth the dovehouse. 'twas no need i trow to bid me trudge. and since that time it is eleven years for then she could stand alone. nay by the rood she could have run and waddled all about for even the day before she broke her brow. and then my husbandgod be with his soul he was a merry mantook up the child. yea quoth he dost thou fall upon thy face thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit wilt thou not jule and by my holy dame the pretty wretch left crying and said ay. to see now how a jest shall come about i warrant an i should live a thousand years i never should forget it. wilt thou not jule quoth he. and pretty fool it stinted and said ay.$lady capulet enough of this. i pray thee hold thy peace.$original text$nurse yes madam. yet i cannot choose but laugh to think it should leave crying and say ay. and yet i warrant it had upon its brow a bump as big as a young cockerels stone a perilous knock and it cried bitterly. yea quoth my husband fallst upon thy face thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age. wilt thou not jule it stinted and said ay.$juliet and stint thou too i pray thee nurse say i.$nurse peace i have done. god mark thee to his grace thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er i nursed. an i might live to see thee married once i have my wish.$lady capulet marry that marry is the very theme i came to talk of. tell me daughter juliet how stands your disposition to be married$juliet it is an honor that i dream not of.$nurse an honor were not i thine only nurse i would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.$lady capulet well think of marriage now. younger than you here in verona ladies of esteem are made already mothers. by my count i was your mother much upon these years that you are now a maid. thus then in brief the valiant paris seeks you for his love.$nurse a man young lady lady such a man as all the world. why hes a man of wax.$original text$lady capulet veronas summer hath not such a flower.$nurse nay hes a flower. in faith a very flower.$lady capulet what say you can you love the gentleman this night you shall behold him at our feast. read o'er the volume of young paris' face and find delight writ there with beautys pen. examine every married lineament and see how one another lends content and what obscured in this fair volume lies find written in the margin of his eyes. this precious book of love this unbound lover to beautify him only lacks a cover. the fish lives in the sea and tis much pride for fair without the fair within to hide. that book in manys eyes doth share the glory that in gold clasps locks in the golden story. so shall you share all that he doth possess by having him making yourself no less.$nurse no less nay bigger. women grow by men.$lady capulet speak briefly. can you like of paris love$juliet ill look to like if looking liking move. but no more deep will i endart mine eye than your consent gives strength to make it fly.$enter peter$original text$peter madam the guests are come supper served up you called my young lady asked for the nurse cursed in the pantry and every thing in extremity. i must hence to wait. i beseech you follow straight.$lady capulet we follow thee.juliet the county stays.$nurse go girl seek happy nights to happy days.$exeunt$original text$enter romeo mercutio benvolio with five or six other maskers and torchbearers$romeo what shall this speech be spoke for our excuse or shall we on without apology$benvolio the date is out of such prolixity. well have no cupid hoodwinked with a scarf bearing a tartars painted bow of lath scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper nor no withoutbook prologue faintly spoke after the prompter for our entrance. but let them measure us by what they will. well measure them a measure and be gone.$romeo give me a torch. i am not for this ambling. being but heavy i will bear the light.$mercutio nay gentle romeo we must have you dance.$romeo not i believe me. you have dancing shoes with nimble soles. i have a soul of lead so stakes me to the ground i cannot move.$mercutio you are a lover. borrow cupids wings and soar with them above a common bound.$romeo i am too sore enpierced with his shaft to soar with his light feathers and so bound i cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. under loves heavy burden do i sink.$original text$mercutio and to sink in it should you burthen love too great oppression for a tender thing.$romeo is love a tender thing it is too rough too rude too boisterous and it pricks like thorn.$mercutio if love be rough with you be rough with love. prick love for pricking and you beat love down. give me a case to put my visage in a visor for a visor.what care i what curious eye doth cote deformities here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.$benvolio come knock and enter. and no sooner in but every man betake him to his legs.$romeo a torch for me. let wantons light of heart tickle the senseless rushes with their heels. for i am proverbed with a grandsire phrase ill be a candle holder and look on. the game was ne'er so fair and i am done.$mercutio tut duns the mouse the constables own word. if thou art dun well draw thee from the mire orsave your reverencelove wherein thou stickst up to the ears. come we burn daylight ho$romeo nay thats not so.$mercutio i mean sir in delay. we waste our lights in vain like lights by day. take our good meaning for our judgment sits five times in that ere once in our fine wits.$original text$romeo and we mean well in going to this mask but tis no wit to go.$mercutio why may one ask$romeo i dreamt a dream tonight.$mercutio and so did i.$romeo well what was yours$mercutio that dreamers often lie.$romeo in bed asleep while they do dream things true.$mercutio oh then i see queen mab hath been with you.$benvolio queen mab whats she$mercutio she is the fairies' midwife and she comes in shape no bigger than an agate stone on the forefinger of an alderman drawn with a team of little atomi over mens noses as they lie asleep. her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs the cover of the wings of grasshoppers her traces of the smallest spiders web her collars of the moonshines watery beams her whip of crickets bone the lash of film her wagoner a small graycoated gnat not half so big as a round little worm pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.$original text$her chariot is an empty hazelnut made by the joiner squirrel or old grub time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers. and in this state she gallops night by night through lovers' brains and then they dream of love on courtiers' knees that dream on curtsies straight o'er lawyers' fingers who straight dream on fees o'er ladies' lips who straight on kisses dream which oft the angry mab with blisters plagues because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are. sometime she gallops o'er a courtiers nose and then dreams he of smelling out a suit. and sometime comes she with a tithepigs tail tickling a parsons nose as he lies asleep then he dreams of another benefice. sometime she driveth o'er a soldiers neck and then dreams he of cutting foreign throats of breaches ambuscadoes spanish blades of healths five fathom deep and then anon drums in his ear at which he starts and wakes and being thus frighted swears a prayer or two and sleeps again. this is that very mab that plaits the manes of horses in the night and bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs which once untangled much misfortune bodes. this is the hag when maids lie on their backs that presses them and learns them first to bear making them women of good carriage. this is she$romeo peace peace mercutio peace thou talkst of nothing.$mercutio true i talk of dreams which are the children of an idle brain begot of nothing but vain fantasy which is as thin of substance as the air and more inconstant than the wind who woos even now the frozen bosom of the north and being angered puffs away from thence turning his face to the dewdropping south.$original text$benvolio this wind you talk of blows us from ourselves. supper is done and we shall come too late.$romeo i fear too early for my mind misgives some consequence yet hanging in the stars shall bitterly begin his fearful date with this nights revels and expire the term of a despised life closed in my breast by some vile forfeit of untimely death. but he that hath the steerage of my course direct my sail. on lusty gentlemen.$benvolio strike drum.$march about the stage and exeunt$original text$peter and other servingmen come forth with napkins$peter wheres potpan that he helps not to take away he shift a trencher he scrape a trencher$first servingman when good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands and they unwashed too tis a foul thing.$peter away with the jointstools remove the courtcupboard look to the plate. good thou save me a piece of marchpane and as thou loves me let the porter let in susan grindstone and nell.antony and potpan$second servingman ay boy ready.$peter you are looked for and called for asked for and sought for in the great chamber.$first servingman we cannot be here and there too. cheerly boys. be brisk awhile and the longer liver take all.$exeunt peter and servingmen$enter capulet with capulet's cousin tybalt lady capulet juliet and others of the house meeting romeo benvolio mercutio and other guests and maskers$capulet welcome gentlemen ladies that have their toes ah my mistresses which of you all unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you. will now deny to dance she that makes dainty she ill swear hath corns. am i come near ye now welcome gentlemen i have seen the day that i have worn a visor and could tell a whispering tale in a fair ladys ear such as would please. 'tis gone tis gone tis gone. you are welcome gentlemen.come musicians play. music plays and they dance a hall a hall give roomand foot it girls. more light you knaves and turn the tables up and quench the fire. the room is grown too hot. ah sirrah this unlookedfor sport comes well. nay sit nay sit good cousin capulet for you and i are past our dancing days. how long is t now since last yourself and i were in a mask$original text$capulets' cousin by'r lady thirty years.$capulet what man tis not so much tis not so much. 'tis since the nuptials of lucentio come pentecost as quickly as it will some five and twenty years and then we masked.$capulet's cousin 'tis more tis more. his son is elder sir. his son is thirty.$capulet will you tell me that his son was but a ward two years ago.$romeo  to a servingman what lady is that which doth enrich the hand of yonder knight$servingman i know not sir.$romeo oh she doth teach the torches to burn bright it seems she hangs upon the cheek of night like a rich jewel in an ethiopes ear beauty too rich for use for earth too dear. so shows a snowy dove trooping with crows as yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. the measure done ill watch her place of stand and touching hers make blessed my rude hand. did my heart love till now forswear it sight for i ne'er saw true beauty till this night.$original text$tybalt this by his voice should be a montague. to his page fetch me my rapier boy. what dares the slave come hither covered with an antic face to fleer and scorn at our solemnity now by the stock and honor of my kin to strike him dead i hold it not a sin.$capulet why how now kinsman wherefore storm you so$tybalt uncle this is a montague our foe a villain that is hither come in spite to scorn at our solemnity this night.$capulet young romeo is it$tybalt 'tis he that villain romeo.$capulet content thee gentle coz. let him alone. he bears him like a portly gentleman and to say truth verona brags of him to be a virtuous and wellgoverned youth. i would not for the wealth of all the town here in my house do him disparagement. therefore be patient. take no note of him. it is my will the which if thou respect show a fair presence and put off these frowns an illbeseeming semblance for a feast.$original text$tybalt it fits when such a villain is a guest. ill not endure him.$capulet he shall be endured. what goodman boy i say he shall. go to. am i the master here or you go to. youll not endure him god shall mend my soul youll make a mutiny among my guests. you will set cockahoop. youll be the man$tybalt why uncle tis a shame.$capulet go to go to. you are a saucy boy. is t so indeed this trick may chance to scathe you i know what. you must contrary me. marry tis time. well said my heartsyou are a princox go. be quiet ormore light more lightfor shame ill make you quiet.what cheerly my hearts$music plays again and the guests dance$tybalt patience perforce with willful choler meeting makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. i will withdraw but this intrusion shall now seeming sweet convert to bitterest gall.$exit tybalt$original text$romeo taking juliets hand if i profane with my unworthiest hand this holy shrine the gentle sin is this my lips two blushing pilgrims ready stand to smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.$juliet good pilgrim you do wrong your hand too much which mannerly devotion shows in this for saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch and palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.$romeo have not saints lips and holy palmers too$juliet ay pilgrim lips that they must use in prayer.$romeo o then dear saint let lips do what hands do. they pray grant thou lest faith turn to despair.$juliet saints do not move though grant for prayers' sake.$romeo then move not while my prayers effect i take.$kisses her$thus from my lips by thine my sin is purged.$juliet then have my lips the sin that they have took.$romeo sin from thy lips o trespass sweetly urged give me my sin again.$they kiss again$original text$juliet you kiss by th' book.$nurse madam your mother craves a word with you.$juliet moves away$romeo what is her mother$nurse marry bachelor her mother is the lady of the house and a good lady and a wise and virtuous. i nursed her daughter that you talked withal. i tell you he that can lay hold of her shall have the chinks.$romeo aside is she a capulet o dear account my life is my foes debt.$benvolio to romeo away begone. the sport is at the best.$romeo ay so i fear. the more is my unrest.$capulet nay gentlemen prepare not to be gone. we have a trifling foolish banquet towards. is it e'en so why then i thank you all. i thank you honest gentlemen. good night. more torches herecome on then lets to bed. ah sirrah by my fay it waxes late. ill to my rest.$all but juliet and nurse move to exit$original text$juliet come hither nurse. what is yond gentleman$nurse the son and heir of old tiberio.$juliet whats he that now is going out of door$nurse marry that i think be young petruchio.$juliet whats he that follows here that would not dance$nurse i know not.$juliet go ask his name.if he be married. my grave is like to be my wedding bed.$nurse his name is romeo and a montague the only son of your great enemy.$juliet aside my only love sprung from my only hate too early seen unknown and known too late prodigious birth of love it is to me that i must love a loathed enemy.$nurse whats this whats this$juliet a rhyme i learned even now of one i danced withal.$one calls within juliet$nurse anon anon come lets away. the strangers all are gone.$exeunt$original text$enter chorus$chorus now old desire doth in his deathbed lie and young affection gapes to be his heir. that fair for which love groaned for and would die with tender juliet matched is now not fair. now romeo is beloved and loves again alike bewitched by the charm of looks but to his foe supposed he must complain and she steal loves sweet bait from fearful hooks. being held a foe he may not have access to breathe such vows as lovers use to swear. and she as much in love her means much less to meet her new beloved anywhere. but passion lends them power time means to meet tempering extremities with extreme sweet.$exit$original text$enter romeo alone$romeo can i go forward when my heart is here turn back dull earth and find thy center out.$moves away enter benvolio with mercutio$benvolio romeo my cousin romeo romeo$mercutio he is wise and on my life hath stol'n him home to bed.$benvolio he ran this way and leapt this orchard wall. call good mercutio.$mercutio nay ill conjure too romeo humours madman passion lover appear thou in the likeness of a sigh speak but one rhyme and i am satisfied. cry but ay me pronounce but love and dove. speak to my gossip venus one fair word one nickname for her purblind son and heir young abraham cupid he that shot so true when king cophetua loved the beggar maid. he heareth not he stirreth not he moveth not. the ape is dead and i must conjure him. i conjure thee by rosalines bright eyes by her high forehead and her scarlet lip by her fine foot straight leg and quivering thigh and the demesnes that there adjacent lie that in thy likeness thou appear to us.$original text$benvolio an if he hear thee thou wilt anger him.$mercutio this cannot anger him. 'twould anger him to raise a spirit in his mistress' circle of some strange nature letting it there stand till she had laid it and conjured it down. that were some spite. my invocation is fair and honest. in his mistress' name i conjure only but to raise up him.$benvolio come he hath hid himself among these trees to be consorted with the humorous night. blind is his love and best befits the dark.$mercutio if love be blind love cannot hit the mark. now will he sit under a medlar tree and wish his mistress were that kind of fruit as maids call medlars when they laugh alone. o romeo that she were oh that she were an open arse and thou a poperin pear. romeo good night. ill to my truckle bed. this fieldbed is too cold for me to sleep. come shall we go$benvolio go then for tis in vain to seek him here that means not to be found.$exeunt$original text$romeo returns$romeo he jests at scars that never felt a wound.$juliet appears in a window above$but soft what light through yonder window breaks it is the east and juliet is the sun. arise fair sun and kill the envious moon who is already sick and pale with grief that thou her maid art far more fair than she. be not her maid since she is envious. her vestal livery is but sick and green and none but fools do wear it. cast it off it is my lady. oh it is my love. oh that she knew she were she speaks yet she says nothing. what of that her eye discourses. i will answer it. i am too bold. 'tis not to me she speaks. two of the fairest stars in all the heaven having some business do entreat her eyes to twinkle in their spheres till they return. what if her eyes were there they in her head the brightness of her cheek would shame those stars as daylight doth a lamp. her eye in heaven would through the airy region stream so bright that birds would sing and think it were not night. see how she leans her cheek upon her hand. oh that i were a glove upon that hand that i might touch that cheek$juliet ay me$original text$romeo aside she speaks. o speak again bright angel for thou art as glorious to this night being o'er my head as is a winged messenger of heaven unto the white upturned wondering eyes of mortals that fall back to gaze on him when he bestrides the lazypuffing clouds and sails upon the bosom of the air.$juliet o romeo romeo wherefore art thou romeo deny thy father and refuse thy name. or if thou wilt not be but sworn my love and ill no longer be a capulet.$romeo aside shall i hear more or shall i speak at this$juliet 'tis but thy name that is my enemy. thou art thyself though not a montague. whats montague it is nor hand nor foot nor arm nor face nor any other part belonging to a man. o be some other name whats in a name that which we call a rose by any other word would smell as sweet. so romeo would were he not romeo called retain that dear perfection which he owes without that title. romeo doff thy name and for that name which is no part of thee take all myself.$romeo i take thee at thy word. call me but love and ill be new baptized. henceforth i never will be romeo.$juliet what man art thou that thus bescreened in night so stumblest on my counsel$original text$romeo by a name i know not how to tell thee who i am. my name dear saint is hateful to myself because it is an enemy to thee. had i it written i would tear the word.$juliet my ears have not yet drunk a hundred words of that tongues uttering yet i know the sound. art thou not romeo and a montague$romeo neither fair maid if either thee dislike.$juliet how camest thou hither tell me and wherefore the orchard walls are high and hard to climb and the place death considering who thou art if any of my kinsmen find thee here.$romeo with loves light wings did i o'erperch these walls for stony limits cannot hold love out and what love can do that dares love attempt. therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.$juliet if they do see thee they will murder thee.$romeo alack there lies more peril in thine eye than twenty of their swords. look thou but sweet and i am proof against their enmity.$juliet i would not for the world they saw thee here.$romeo i have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes and but thou love me let them find me here. my life were better ended by their hate than death prorogued wanting of thy love.$original text$juliet by whose direction foundst thou out this place$romeo by love that first did prompt me to inquire. he lent me counsel and i lent him eyes. i am no pilot. yet wert thou as far as that vast shore washed with the farthest sea i would adventure for such merchandise.$juliet thou knowst the mask of night is on my face else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek for that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. fain would i dwell on form. fain fain deny what i have spoke. but farewell compliment dost thou love me i know thou wilt say ay and i will take thy word. yet if thou swearst thou mayst prove false. at lovers' perjuries they say jove laughs. o gentle romeo if thou dost love pronounce it faithfully. or if thou thinkst i am too quickly won ill frown and be perverse and say thee nay so thou wilt woo. but else not for the world. in truth fair montague i am too fond and therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light. but trust me gentleman ill prove more true than those that have more coying to be strange. i should have been more strange i must confess but that thou overheardst ere i was 'ware my true loves passion. therefore pardon me and not impute this yielding to light love which the dark night hath so discovered.$romeo lady by yonder blessed moon i vow that tips with silver all these fruittree tops$original text$juliet o swear not by the moon th' inconstant moon that monthly changes in her circle orb lest that thy love prove likewise variable.$romeo what shall i swear by$juliet do not swear at all. or if thou wilt swear by thy gracious self which is the god of my idolatry and ill believe thee.$romeo if my hearts dear love$juliet well do not swear. although i joy in thee i have no joy of this contract tonight. it is too rash too unadvised too sudden too like the lightning which doth cease to be ere one can say it lightens. sweet good night. this bud of love by summers ripening breath may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. good night good night as sweet repose and rest come to thy heart as that within my breast.$romeo o wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied$juliet what satisfaction canst thou have tonight$romeo th' exchange of thy loves faithful vow for mine.$juliet i gave thee mine before thou didst request it and yet i would it were to give again.$romeo wouldst thou withdraw it for what purpose love$original text$juliet but to be frank and give it thee again. and yet i wish but for the thing i have. my bounty is as boundless as the sea my love as deep. the more i give to thee the more i have for both are infinite.$nurse calls from within$i hear some noise within. dear love adieu. anon good nursesweet montague be true. stay but a little. i will come again.$exit juliet above$romeo o blessed blessed night i am afeard being in night all this is but a dream too flattering sweet to be substantial.$enter juliet above$juliet three words dear romeo and good night indeed. if that thy bent of love be honorable thy purpose marriage send me word tomorrow by one that ill procure to come to thee where and what time thou wilt perform the rite and all my fortunes at thy foot ill lay and follow thee my lord throughout the world.$nurse from within madam$juliet i come anon.but if thou meanst not well i do beseech thee$nurse from within madam$original text$juliet by and by i come. to cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. tomorrow will i send.$romeo so thrive my soul$juliet a thousand times good night$exit juliet above$romeo a thousand times the worse to want thy light. love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books but love from love toward school with heavy looks.$moves to exit reenter juliet above$juliet hist romeo histoh for a falconers voice to lure this tasselgentle back again bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud else would i tear the cave where echo lies and make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine with repetition of my romeo$romeo it is my soul that calls upon my name. how silversweet sound lovers' tongues by night like softest music to attending ears$original text$juliet romeo$romeo my nyas$juliet what o'clock tomorrow shall i send to thee$romeo by the hour of nine.$juliet i will not fail. 'tis twenty year till then. i have forgot why i did call thee back.$romeo let me stand here till thou remember it.$juliet i shall forget to have thee still stand there remembering how i love thy company.$romeo and ill still stay to have thee still forget forgetting any other home but this.$juliet 'tis almost morning. i would have thee gone. and yet no further than a wantons bird that lets it hop a little from his hand like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves and with a silken thread plucks it back again so lovingjealous of his liberty.$romeo i would i were thy bird.$juliet sweet so would i. yet i should kill thee with much cherishing. good night good night parting is such sweet sorrow that i shall say good night till it be morrow.$exit juliet above$original text$romeo sleep dwell upon thine eyes peace in thy breast. would i were sleep and peace so sweet to rest. hence will i to my ghostly friars close cell his help to crave and my dear hap to tell.$exit$original text$enter friar lawrence with a basket$friar lawrence the grayeyed morn smiles on the frowning night checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light and fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels from forth days path and titans fiery wheels. now ere the sun advance his burning eye the day to cheer and nights dank dew to dry i must upfill this osier cage of ours with baleful weeds and preciousjuiced flowers. the earth thats natures mother is her tomb. what is her burying grave that is her womb. and from her womb children of divers kind we sucking on her natural bosom find many for many virtues excellent none but for some and yet all different. oh mickle is the powerful grace that lies in herbs plants stones and their true qualities. for naught so vile that on the earth doth live but to the earth some special good doth give. nor aught so good but strained from that fair use revolts from true birth stumbling on abuse. virtue itself turns vice being misapplied and vice sometime by action dignified.$enter romeo$within the infant rind of this small flower poison hath residence and medicine power. for this being smelt with that part cheers each part being tasted stays all senses with the heart. two such opposed kings encamp them still in man as well as herbsgrace and rude will.$original text$and where the worser is predominant full soon the canker death eats up that plant.$romeo good morrow father.$friar lawrence benedicite. what early tongue so sweet saluteth me young son it argues a distempered head so soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. care keeps his watch in every old mans eye and where care lodges sleep will never lie. but where unbruised youth with unstuffed brain doth couch his limbs there golden sleep doth reign. therefore thy earliness doth me assure thou art uproused by some distemperature. or if not so then here i hit it right our romeo hath not been in bed tonight.$romeo that last is true. the sweeter rest was mine.$friar lawrence god pardon sin wast thou with rosaline$romeo with rosaline my ghostly father no. i have forgot that name and that names woe.$friar lawrence thats my good son. but where hast thou been then$romeo ill tell thee ere thou ask it me again. i have been feasting with mine enemy where on a sudden one hath wounded me thats by me wounded. both our remedies within thy help and holy physic lies. i bear no hatred blessed man for lo my intercession likewise steads my foe.$original text$friar lawrence be plain good son and homely in thy drift. riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.$romeo then plainly know my hearts dear love is set on the fair daughter of rich capulet. as mine on hers so hers is set on mine and all combined save what thou must combine by holy marriage. when and where and how we met we wooed and made exchange of vow ill tell thee as we pass but this i pray that thou consent to marry us today.$friar lawrence holy saint francis what a change is here is rosaline whom thou didst love so dear so soon forsaken young mens love then lies not truly in their hearts but in their eyes. jesu maria what a deal of brine hath washed thy sallow cheeks for rosaline how much salt water thrown away in waste to season love that of it doth not taste the sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears. lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit of an old tear that is not washed off yet. if e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine thou and these woes were all for rosaline. and art thou changed pronounce this sentence then women may fall when theres no strength in men.$romeo thou chidst me oft for loving rosaline.$friar lawrence for doting not for loving pupil mine.$romeo and badest me bury love.$original text$friar lawrence not in a grave to lay one in another out to have.$romeo i pray thee chide not. her i love now doth grace for grace and love for love allow. the other did not so.$friar lawrence oh she knew well thy love did read by rote that could not spell. but come young waverer come go with me in one respect ill thy assistant be for this alliance may so happy prove to turn your households' rancor to pure love.$romeo oh let us hence. i stand on sudden haste.$friar lawrence wisely and slow. they stumble that run fast.$exeunt$original text$enter benvolio and mercutio$mercutio where the devil should this romeo be came he not home tonight$benvolio not to his fathers. i spoke with his man.$mercutio why that same pale hardhearted wench that rosaline torments him so that he will sure run mad.$benvolio tybalt the kinsman to old capulet hath sent a letter to his fathers house.$mercutio a challenge on my life.$benvolio romeo will answer it.$mercutio any man that can write may answer a letter.$benvolio nay he will answer the letters master how he dares being dared.$mercutio alas poor romeo he is already dead stabbed with a white wenchs black eye shot through the ear with a love song the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bowboys butt shaft. and is he a man to encounter tybalt$benvolio why what is tybalt$mercutio more than prince of cats. oh hes the courageous captain of compliments. he fights as you sing pricksong keeps time distance and proportion. he rests his minim restsone two and the third in your bosom. the very butcher of a silk button a duelist a duelist a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. ah the immortal passado the punto reverso the hai$original text$benvolio the what$mercutio the pox of such antic lisping affecting fantasmines these new tuners of accents by jesu a very good blade a very tall man a very good whore why is not this a lamentable thing grandsire that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies these fashionmongers these pardon mes who stand so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench oh their bones their bones$enter romeo$benvolio here comes romeo here comes romeo.$mercutio without his roe like a dried herring. o flesh flesh how art thou fishified now is he for the numbers that petrarch flowed in. laura to his lady was but a kitchenwench marry she had a better love to berhyme herdido a dowdy cleopatra a gypsy helen and hero hildings and harlots thisbe a grey eye or so but not to the purpose. signior romeo bonjour theres a french salutation to your french slop. you gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.$original text$romeo good morrow to you both. what counterfeit did i give you$mercutio the slip sir the slip. can you not conceive$romeo pardon good mercutio my business was great and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.$mercutio thats as much as to say such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.$romeo meaning to curtsy$mercutio thou hast most kindly hit it.$romeo a most courteous exposition.$mercutio nay i am the very pink of courtesy.$romeo pink for flower.$mercutio right.$original text$romeo why then is my pump well flowered.$mercutio sure wit follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump that when the single sole of it is worn the jest may remain after the wearing solely singular.$romeo o singlesoled jest solely singular for the singleness.$mercutio come between us good benvolio. my wits faints.$romeo switch and spurs switch and spurs or ill cry a match.$mercutio nay if our wits run the wildgoose chase i am done for thou hast more of the wildgoose in one of thy wits than i am sure i have in my whole five. was i with you there for the goose$romeo thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there for the goose.$mercutio i will bite thee by the ear for that jest.$romeo nay good goose bite not.$mercutio thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. it is a most sharp sauce.$romeo and is it not well served into a sweet goose$mercutio oh heres a wit of cheveril that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad$original text$romeo i stretch it out for that word broad which added to the goose proves thee far and wide a broad goose.$mercutio why is not this better now than groaning for love now art thou sociable. now art thou romeo. now art thou what thou artby art as well as by nature for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.$benvolio stop there stop there.$mercutio thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.$benvolio thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.$mercutio oh thou art deceived. i would have made it short for i was come to the whole depth of my tale and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer.$enter nurse and her man peter$romeo heres goodly gear.$benvolio a sail a sail$mercutio two twoa shirt and a smock.$nurse peter$original text$peter anon$nurse my fan peter.$mercutio good peter to hide her face for her fans the fairer face.$nurse god ye good morrow gentlemen.$mercutio god ye good e'en fair gentlewoman.$nurse is it good e'en$mercutio 'tis no less i tell you for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.$nurse out upon you what a man are you$mercutio one gentlewoman that god hath made himself to mar.$nurse by my troth it is well said. for himself to mar quoth he gentlemen can any of you tell me where i may find the young romeo$romeo i can tell you but young romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. i am the youngest of that name for fault of a worse.$nurse you say well.$original text$mercutio yea is the worst well very well took i' faith wisely wisely.$nurse if you be he sir i desire some confidence with you.$benvolio she will indite him to some supper.$mercutio a bawd a bawd a bawd so ho$romeo what hast thou found$mercutio no hare sir unless a hare sir in a lenten piethat is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.$sings an old hare hoar and an old hare hoar is very good meat in lent. but a hare that is hoar is too much for a score when it hoars ere it be spent.  speaks$romeo will you come to your fathers well to dinner thither.$romeo i will follow you.$original text$mercutio farewell ancient lady. farewell lady lady lady.$exeunt mercutio and benvolio$nurse i pray you sir what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery$romeo a gentleman nurse that loves to hear himself talk and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.$nurse an he speak any thing against me ill take him down an he were lustier than he is and twenty such jacks. and if i cannot ill find those that shall. scurvy knave i am none of his flirtgills. i am none of his skainsmates. to peter and thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure$peter i saw no man use you at his pleasure. if i had my weapon should quickly have been out i warrant you. i dare draw as soon as another man if i see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.$nurse now afore god i am so vexed that every part about me quivers. scurvy knave to romeo pray you sir a word. and as i told you my young lady bid me inquire you out. what she bade me say i will keep to myself. but first let me tell ye if ye should lead her into a fools paradise as they say it were a very gross kind of behavior as they say. for the gentlewoman is young and therefore if you should deal double with her truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman and very weak dealing.$original text$romeo nurse commend me to thy lady and mistress. i protest unto thee$nurse good heart and i' faith i will tell her as much. lord lord she will be a joyful woman.$romeo what wilt thou tell her nurse thou dost not mark me.$nurse i will tell her sir that you do protest which as i take it is a gentlemanlike offer.$romeo bid her devise some means to come to shrift this afternoon. and there she shall at friar lawrence' cell be shrived and married. gives her coins here is for thy pains.$nurse no truly sir. not a penny.$romeo go to. i say you shall.$nurse  takes the money this afternoon sir well she shall be there.$romeo and stay good nurse. behind the abbey wall within this hour my man shall be with thee and bring thee cords made like a tackled stair which to the high topgallant of my joy must be my convoy in the secret night. farewell. be trusty and ill quit thy pains. farewell. commend me to thy mistress.$original text$nurse now god in heaven bless thee hark you sir.$romeo what sayst thou my dear nurse$nurse is your man secret did you ne'er hear say two may keep counsel putting one away$romeo warrant thee my mans as true as steel.$nurse well sir my mistress is the sweetest lady.lord lord when twas a little prating thing.oh there is a nobleman in town one paris that would fain lay knife aboard but she good soul had as lief see a toad a very toad as see him. i anger her sometimes and tell her that paris is the properer man. but ill warrant you when i say so she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. doth not rosemary and romeo begin both with a letter$romeo ay nurse what of that both with an r.$nurse ah mocker thats the dogs name. r is for theno i know it begins with some other letter and she hath the prettiest sententious of it of you and rosemary that it would do you good to hear it.$romeo commend me to thy lady.$nurse ay a thousand times.peter$peter anon$nurse before and apace.$exeunt$original text$enter juliet$juliet the clock struck nine when i did send the nurse. in half an hour she promised to return. perchance she cannot meet him. thats not so. oh she is lame loves heralds should be thoughts which ten times faster glide than the suns beams driving back shadows over louring hills. therefore do nimblepinioned doves draw love and therefore hath the windswift cupid wings. now is the sun upon the highmost hill of this days journey and from nine till twelve is three long hours yet she is not come. had she affections and warm youthful blood she would be as swift in motion as a ball. my words would bandy her to my sweet love and his to me. but old folks many feign as they were dead unwieldy slow heavy and pale as lead.$enter nurse and peter$o god she comes.o honey nurse what news hast thou met with him send thy man away.$nurse peter stay at the gate.$exit peter$juliet now good sweet nurse o lord why lookst thou sad though news be sad yet tell them merrily. if good thou shamest the music of sweet news by playing it to me with so sour a face.$original text$nurse i am aweary. give me leave awhile. fie how my bones ache what a jaunt have i$juliet i would thou hadst my bones and i thy news. nay come i pray thee speak. good good nurse speak.$nurse jesu what haste can you not stay awhile do you not see that i am out of breath$juliet how art thou out of breath when thou hast breath to say to me that thou art out of breath the excuse that thou dost make in this delay is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. is thy news good or bad answer to that. say either and ill stay the circumstance. let me be satisfied. is t good or bad$nurse well you have made a simple choice. you know not how to choose a man. romeo no not he though his face be better than any mans yet his leg excels all mens and for a hand and a foot and a body though they be not to be talked on yet they are past compare. he is not the flower of courtesy but ill warrant him as gentle as a lamb. go thy ways wench. serve god. what have you dined at home$juliet no no. but all this did i know before. what says he of our marriage what of that$nurse lord how my head aches what a head have i it beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. my back a' t' other side. ah my back my back beshrew your heart for sending me about to catch my death with jaunting up and down$original text$juliet i' faith i am sorry that thou art not well. sweet sweet sweet nurse tell me what says my love$nurse your love says like an honest gentleman and a courteous and a kind and a handsome and i warrant a virtuous where is your mother$juliet where is my mother why she is within. where should she be how oddly thou repliest your love says like an honest gentleman 'where is your mother'$nurse o gods lady dear are you so hot marry come up i trow. is this the poultice for my aching bones henceforward do your messages yourself.$juliet heres such a coil. come what says romeo$nurse have you got leave to go to shrift today$juliet i have.$nurse then hie you hence to friar lawrences cell. there stays a husband to make you a wife. now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks. theyll be in scarlet straight at any news. hie you to church. i must another way to fetch a ladder by the which your love must climb a birds nest soon when it is dark. i am the drudge and toil in your delight but you shall bear the burden soon at night. go. ill to dinner. hie you to the cell.$original text$juliet hie to high fortune honest nurse farewell.$exeunt$original text$enter friar lawrence and romeo$friar lawrence so smile the heavens upon this holy act that afterhours with sorrow chide us not.$romeo amen amen. but come what sorrow can it cannot countervail the exchange of joy that one short minute gives me in her sight. do thou but close our hands with holy words then lovedevouring death do what he dare it is enough i may but call her mine.$friar lawrence these violent delights have violent ends and in their triumph die like fire and powder which as they kiss consume. the sweetest honey is loathsome in his own deliciousness and in the taste confounds the appetite. therefore love moderately. long love doth so. too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.$enter juliet somewhat fast and embraceth romeo$here comes the lady. oh so light a foot will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint. a lover may bestride the gossamers that idles in the wanton summer air and yet not fall. so light is vanity.$juliet good even to my ghostly confessor.$friar lawrence romeo shall thank thee daughter for us both.$original text$juliet as much to him else is his thanks too much.$romeo ah juliet if the measure of thy joy be heaped like mine and that thy skill be more to blazon it then sweeten with thy breath this neighbor air and let rich musics tongue unfold the imagined happiness that both receive in either by this dear encounter.$juliet conceit more rich in matter than in words brags of his substance not of ornament. they are but beggars that can count their worth. but my true love is grown to such excess i cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.$friar lawrence come come with me and we will make short work. for by your leaves you shall not stay alone till holy church incorporate two in one.$exeunt$original text$enter mercutio benvolio mercutios page and others$benvolio i pray thee good mercutio lets retire. the day is hot the capulets abroad and if we meet we shall not scape a brawl for now these hot days is the mad blood stirring.$mercutio thou art like one of those fellows that when he enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword upon the table and says god send me no need of thee and by the operation of the second cup draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.$benvolio am i like such a fellow$mercutio come come thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in italy and as soon moved to be moody and as soon moody to be moved.$benvolio and what to$mercutio nay an there were two such we should have none shortly for one would kill the other. thou why thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. thou hast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before easter with another for tying his new shoes with old ribbon and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling$original text$benvolio an i were so apt to quarrel as thou art any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.$mercutio the fee simple o simple$enter tybalt petruchio and other capulets$benvolio by my head here comes the capulets.$mercutio by my heel i care not.$tybalt follow me close for i will speak to them. gentlemen good e'en. a word with one of you.$mercutio and but one word with one of us couple it with something. make it a word and a blow.$tybalt you shall find me apt enough to that sir an you will give me occasion.$mercutio could you not take some occasion without giving$tybalt mercutio thou consortst with romeo.$original text$mercutio consort what dost thou make us minstrels an thou make minstrels of us look to hear nothing but discords. heres my fiddlestick. heres that shall make you dance. zounds consort$benvolio we talk here in the public haunt of men. either withdraw unto some private place and reason coldly of your grievances or else depart. here all eyes gaze on us.$mercutio mens eyes were made to look and let them gaze. i will not budge for no mans pleasure i.$enter romeo$tybalt well peace be with you sir. here comes my man.$mercutio but ill be hanged sir if he wear your livery. marry go before to field hell be your follower. your worship in that sense may call him man.$tybalt romeo the love i bear thee can afford no better term than this thou art a villain.$romeo tybalt the reason that i have to love thee doth much excuse the appertaining rage to such a greeting. villain am i none. therefore farewell. i see thou knowst me not.$tybalt boy this shall not excuse the injuries that thou hast done me. therefore turn and draw.$original text$romeo i do protest i never injured thee but love thee better than thou canst devise till thou shalt know the reason of my love. and so good capuletwhich name i tender as dearly as my ownbe satisfied.$mercutio o calm dishonourable vile submission  alla stoccata carries it away. draws his sword tybalt you ratcatcher will you walk$tybalt what wouldst thou have with me$mercutio good king of cats nothing but one of your nine lives that i mean to make bold withal and as you shall use me hereafter drybeat the rest of the eight. will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears make haste lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.$tybalt i am for you. draws his sword$romeo gentle mercutio put thy rapier up.$mercutio come sir your passado.$mercutio and tybalt fight$romeo draws his sword draw benvolio. beat down their weapons. gentlemen for shame forbear this outrage. tybalt mercutio the prince expressly hath forbidden bandying in verona streets. hold tybalt good mercutio$original text$romeo tries to break up the fight tybalt stabs mercutio under romeos am$petruchio away tybalt.$exeunt tybalt petruchio and the other capulets$mercutio i am hurt. a plague o' both your houses i am sped. is he gone and hath nothing$benvolio what art thou hurt$mercutio ay ay a scratch a scratch. marry tis enough. where is my pagego villain fetch a surgeon.$exit mercutio's page$romeo courage man. the hurt cannot be much.$mercutio no tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a churchdoor but tis enough twill serve. ask for me tomorrow and you shall find me a grave man. i am peppered i warrant for this world. a plague o' both your houses zounds a dog a rat a mouse a cat to scratch a man to death a braggart a rogue a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic why the devil came you between us i was hurt under your arm. $romeo i thought all for the best.$original text$mercutio help me into some house benvolio or i shall faint. a plague o' both your houses they have made worms' meat of me. i have it and soundly too. your houses$exeunt mercutio and benvolio$romeo this gentleman the princes near ally my very friend hath got his mortal hurt in my behalf. my reputation stained with tybalts slander.tybalt that an hour hath been my kinsman o sweet juliet thy beauty hath made me effeminate and in my temper softened valors steel$enter benvolio$benvolio o romeo romeo brave mercutio is dead that gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds which too untimely here did scorn the earth.$romeo this days black fate on more days doth depend. this but begins the woe others must end.$enter tybalt$benvolio here comes the furious tybalt back again.$romeo alive in triumphand mercutio slain away to heaven respective lenity and fireeyed fury be my conduct now. now tybalt take the villain back again that late thou gavest me for mercutios soul is but a little way above our heads staying for thine to keep him company. either thou or i or both must go with him.$original text$tybalt thou wretched boy that didst consort him here shalt with him hence.$romeo this shall determine that.$they fight. tybalt falls$benvolio romeo away be gone the citizens are up and tybalt slain. stand not amazed. the prince will doom thee death if thou art taken. hence be gone away$romeo oh i am fortunes fool$benvolio why dost thou stay$exit romeo$enter citizens of the watch$citizen of the watch which way ran he that killed mercutio tybalt that murderer which way ran he$benvolio there lies that tybalt.$citizen of the watch to tybalt up sir go with me. i charge thee in the princes name obey.$enter prince montague capulet lady montague lady capulet and others$original text$prince where are the vile beginners of this fray$benvolio o noble prince i can discover all the unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. there lies the man slain by young romeo that slew thy kinsman brave mercutio.$lady capulet tybalt my cousin o my brothers child o prince o cousin husband oh the blood is spilled of my dear kinsman prince as thou art true for blood of ours shed blood of montague. o cousin cousin$prince benvolio who began this bloody fray$benvolio tybalt here slain whom romeos hand did slay. romeo that spoke him fair bade him bethink how nice the quarrel was and urged withal your high displeasure. all this uttered with gentle breath calm look knees humbly bowed could not take truce with the unruly spleen of tybalt deaf to peace but that he tilts with piercing steel at bold mercutios breast who all as hot turns deadly point to point and with a martial scorn with one hand beats cold death aside and with the other sends it back to tybalt whose dexterity retorts it. romeo he cries aloud hold friends friends part and swifter than his tongue his agile arm beats down their fatal points and twixt them rushesunderneath whose arm an envious thrust from tybalt hit the life of stout mercutio and then tybalt fled.$original text$but by and by comes back to romeo who had but newly entertained revenge and to t they go like lightning for ere i could draw to part them was stout tybalt slain. and as he fell did romeo turn and fly. this is the truth or let benvolio die.$lady capulet he is a kinsman to the montague. affection makes him false. he speaks not true. some twenty of them fought in this black strife and all those twenty could but kill one life. i beg for justice which thou prince must give. romeo slew tybalt. romeo must not live.$prince romeo slew him he slew mercutio. who now the price of his dear blood doth owe$montague not romeo prince he was mercutios friend. his fault concludes but what the law should end the life of tybalt.$prince and for that offence immediately we do exile him hence. i have an interest in your hearts' proceeding. my blood for your rude brawls doth lie ableeding. but ill amerce you with so strong a fine that you shall all repent the loss of mine. i will be deaf to pleading and excuses. nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses therefore use none. let romeo hence in haste else when hes found that hour is his last. bear hence this body and attend our will. mercy but murders pardoning those that kill.$exeunt$original text$enter juliet alone$juliet gallop apace you fieryfooted steeds toward phoebus' lodging. such a wagoner as phaeton would whip you to the west and bring in cloudy night immediately. spread thy close curtain loveperforming night that runaways' eyes may wink and romeo leap to these arms untalked of and unseen. lovers can see to do their amorous rites by their own beauties or if love be blind it best agrees with night. come civil night thou sobersuited matron all in black and learn me how to lose a winning match played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. hood my unmanned blood bating in my cheeks with thy black mantle till strange love grow bold think true love acted simple modesty. come night. come romeo. come thou day in night for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night whiter than new snow upon a ravens back. come gentle night come loving blackbrowed night give me my romeo. and when i shall die take him and cut him out in little stars and he will make the face of heaven so fine that all the world will be in love with night and pay no worship to the garish sun. oh i have bought the mansion of a love but not possessed it and though i am sold not yet enjoyed. so tedious is this day as is the night before some festival to an impatient child that hath new robes and may not wear them.$original text$enter nurse with cords$oh here comes my nurse and she brings news and every tongue that speaks but romeos name speaks heavenly eloquence. now nurse what news what hast thou there the cords that romeo bid thee fetch$nurse ay ay the cords.$juliet ay me what news why dost thou wring thy hands$nurse ah welladay hes dead hes dead hes dead we are undone lady we are undone alack the day hes gone hes killed hes dead$juliet can heaven be so envious$nurse romeo can though heaven cannot. o romeo romeo who ever would have thought it romeo$juliet what devil art thou that dost torment me thus this torture should be roared in dismal hell. hath romeo slain himself say thou but ay and that bare vowel i shall poison more than the deathdarting eye of cockatrice. i am not i if there be such an i or those eyes shut that makes thee answer ay. if he be slain say ay or if not no. brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.$nurse i saw the wound i saw it with mine eyes god save the markhere on his manly breast. a piteous corse a bloody piteous corse. pale pale as ashes all bedaubed in blood all in gore blood. i swooned at the sight.$original text$juliet o break my hear poor bankrupt break at once to prison eyes ne'er look on liberty. vile earth to earth resign. end motion here and thou and romeo press one heavy bier.$nurse o tybalt tybalt the best friend i had o courteous tybalt honest gentleman that ever i should live to see thee dead.$juliet what storm is this that blows so contrary is romeo slaughtered and is tybalt dead my dearest cousin and my dearer lord then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom for who is living if those two are gone$nurse tybalt is gone and romeo banished. romeo that killed himhe is banished.$juliet o god did romeos hand shed tybalts blood$nurse it did it did. alas the day it did.$juliet o serpent heart hid with a flowering face did ever dragon keep so fair a cave beautiful tyrant fiend angelical dovefeathered raven wolvishravening lamb despised substance of divinest show just opposite to what thou justly seemst. a damned saint an honorable villain o nature what hadst thou to do in hell when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend in moral paradise of such sweet flesh was ever book containing such vile matter so fairly bound oh that deceit should dwell in such a gorgeous palace$original text$nurse theres no trust no faith no honesty in men. all perjured all forsworn all naught all dissemblers. ah wheres my mangive me some aqua vitae. these griefs these woes these sorrows make me old. shame come to romeo$juliet blistered be thy tongue for such a wish he was not born to shame. upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit for tis a throne where honor may be crowned. sole monarch of the universal earth oh what a beast was i to chide at him$nurse will you speak well of him that killed your cousin$juliet shall i speak ill of him that is my husband ah poor my lord what tongue shall smooth thy name when i thy three hours' wife have mangled it but wherefore villain didst thou kill my cousin that villain cousin would have killed my husband. back foolish tears back to your native spring. your tributary drops belong to woe which you mistaking offer up to joy. my husband lives that tybalt would have slain and tybalts dead that would have slain my husband. all this is comfort. wherefore weep i then some word there was worser than tybalts death that murdered me. i would forget it fain but oh it presses to my memory like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds. tybalt is dead and romeo banished.$original text$that banished that one word banished hath slain ten thousand tybalts. tybalts death was woe enough if it had ended there. or if sour woe delights in fellowship and needly will be ranked with other griefs why followed not when she said tybalts dead thy father or thy mother nay or both which modern lamentations might have moved but with a rearward following tybalts death romeo is banished. to speak that word is father mother tybalt romeo juliet all slain all dead. romeo is banished. there is no end no limit measure bound in that words death. no words can that woe sound. where is my father and my mother nurse$nurse weeping and wailing over tybalts corse. will you go to them i will bring you thither.$juliet wash they his wounds with tears mine shall be spent when theirs are dry for romeos banishment. take up those cords.poor ropes you are beguiled both you and i for romeo is exiled. he made you for a highway to my bed but i a maid die maidenwidowed. come cords.come nurse. ill to my wedding bed. and death not romeo take my maidenhead$nurse hie to your chamber. ill find romeo to comfort you. i wot well where he is. hark ye your romeo will be here at night. ill to him. he is hid at lawrence' cell.$original text$juliet gives the nurse a ringo find him give this ring to my true knight and bid him come to take his last farewell.$exeunt$original text$enter friar lawrence$friar lawrence romeo come forth. come forth thou fearful man. affliction is enamoured of thy parts and thou art wedded to calamity.$enter romeo$romeo father what news what is the princes doom what sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand that i yet know not$friar lawrence too familiar is my dear son with such sour company. i bring thee tidings of the princes doom.$romeo what less than doomsday is the princes doom$friar lawrence a gentler judgment vanished from his lips not bodys death but bodys banishment.$romeo ha banishment be merciful say death for exile hath more terror in his look much more than death. do not say banishment.$friar lawrence hence from verona art thou banished. be patient for the world is broad and wide.$romeo there is no world without verona walls but purgatory torture hell itself. hence banished is banished from the world and worlds exile is death. then banished$original text$is death mistermed. calling death banishment thou cuttst my head off with a golden ax and smilest upon the stroke that murders me.$friar lawrence o deadly sin o rude unthankfulness thy fault our law calls death but the kind prince taking thy part hath rushed aside the law and turned that black word death to banishment. this is dear mercy and thou seest it not.$romeo 'tis torture and not mercy. heaven is here where juliet lives and every cat and dog and little mouse every unworthy thing live here in heaven and may look on her but romeo may not. more validity more honorable state more courtship lives in carrion flies than romeo. they may seize on the white wonder of dear juliets hand and steal immortal blessing from her lips who even in pure and vestal modesty still blush as thinking their own kisses sin. but romeo may not. he is banished. flies may do this but i from this must fly. they are free men but i am banished. and sayst thou yet that exile is not death hadst thou no poison mixed no sharpground knife no sudden mean of death though ne'er so mean but banished to kill mebanished o friar the damned use that word in hell. howling attends it. how hast thou the heart being a divine a ghostly confessor a sinabsolver and my friend professed to mangle me with that word banished$friar lawrence thou fond mad man hear me a little speak.$original text$romeo oh thou wilt speak again of banishment.$friar lawrence ill give thee armor to keep off that word adversitys sweet milk philosophy to comfort thee though thou art banished.$romeo yet banished hang up philosophy unless philosophy can make a juliet displant a town reverse a princes doom it helps not it prevails not. talk no more.$friar lawrence oh then i see that madmen have no ears.$romeo how should they when that wise men have no eyes$friar lawrence let me dispute with thee of thy estate.$romeo thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. wert thou as young as i juliet thy love an hour but married tybalt murdered doting like me and like me banished then mightst thou speak then mightst thou tear thy hair and fall upon the ground as i do now taking the measure of an unmade grave.$knocking from within$friar lawrence arise. one knocks. good romeo hide thyself.$original text$romeo not i unless the breath of heartsick groans mistlike infold me from the search of eyes.$knocking$friar lawrence hark how they knockwhos thereromeo arise. thou wilt be taken.stay awhile.stand up.$knocking$run to my study.by and bygods will what simpleness is thisi come i come.$knocking$who knocks so hard whence come you whats your will$nurse from within let me come in and you shall know my errand. i come from lady juliet.$friar lawrence opens the door welcome then.$enter nurse$nurse o holy friar o tell me holy friar where is my ladys lord wheres romeo$original text$friar lawrence there on the ground with his own tears made drunk.$nurse oh he is even in my mistress' case just in her case. o woeful sympathy piteous predicament even so lies she blubbering and weeping weeping and blubbering. stand up stand up. stand an you be a man. for juliets sake for her sake rise and stand. why should you fall into so deep an o$romeo nurse$nurse ah sir ah sir. deaths the end of all.$romeo spakest thou of juliet how is it with her doth she not think me an old murderer now i have stained the childhood of our joy with blood removed but little from her own where is she and how doth she and what says my concealed lady to our canceled love$nurse oh she says nothing sir but weeps and weeps and now falls on her bed and then starts up and tybalt calls and then on romeo cries and then down falls again.$romeo as if that name shot from the deadly level of a gun did murder her as that names cursed hand murdered her kinsman. o tell me friar tell me in what vile part of this anatomy doth my name lodge tell me that i may sack the hateful mansion. draws his dagger$original text$friar lawrence hold thy desperate hand. art thou a man thy form cries out thou art. thy tears are womanish. thy wild acts denote the unreasonable fury of a beast. unseemly woman in a seeming man and illbeseeming beast in seeming both thou hast amazed me. by my holy order i thought thy disposition better tempered. hast thou slain tybalt wilt thou slay thyself and slay thy lady that in thy life lives by doing damned hate upon thyself why railst thou on thy birth the heaven and earth since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet in thee at once which thou at once wouldst lose fie fie thou shamest thy shape thy love thy wit which like a usurer aboundst in all and usest none in that true use indeed which should bedeck thy shape thy love thy wit. thy noble shape is but a form of wax digressing from the valor of a man thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish thy wit that ornament to shape and love misshapen in the conduct of them both like powder in a skillless soldiers flask is set afire by thine own ignorance and thou dismembered with thine own defence. what rouse thee man thy juliet is alive for whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead there art thou happy. tybalt would kill thee but thou slewst tybaltthere art thou happy. the law that threatened death becomes thy friend and turns it to exilethere art thou happy. a pack of blessings light upon thy back happiness courts thee in her best array$original text$but like a misbehaved and sullen wench thou poutst upon thy fortune and thy love. take heed take heed for such die miserable. go get thee to thy love as was decreed. ascend her chamber hence and comfort her. but look thou stay not till the watch be set for then thou canst not pass to mantua where thou shalt live till we can find a time to blaze your marriage reconcile your friends beg pardon of the prince and call thee back with twenty hundred thousand times more joy than thou wentst forth in lamentation. go before nurse. commend me to thy lady and bid her hasten all the house to bed which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. romeo is coming.$nurse o lord i could have stayed here all the night to hear good counsel. oh what learning is my lord ill tell my lady you will come.$romeo do so and bid my sweet prepare to chide.$nurse here sir a ring she bid me give you sir. gives romeo juliets ring hie you make haste for it grows very late.$exit nurse$romeo how well my comfort is revived by this$original text$friar lawrence go hence. good night. and here stands all your state either be gone before the watch be set or by the break of day disguised from hence. sojourn in mantua. ill find out your man and he shall signify from time to time every good hap to you that chances here. give me thy hand. 'tis late. farewell good night.$romeo but that a joy past joy calls out on me it were a grief so brief to part with thee. farewell.$exeunt$original text$enter capulet lady capulet and paris$capulet things have fall'n out sir so unluckily that we have had no time to move our daughter. look you she loved her kinsman tybalt dearly and so did i. well we were born to die. 'tis very late. shell not come down tonight. i promise you but for your company i would have been abed an hour ago.$paris these times of woe afford no time to woo. madam good night. commend me to your daughter.$lady capulet i will and know her mind early tomorrow. tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.$capulet sir paris i will make a desperate tender of my childs love. i think she will be ruled in all respects by me. nay more i doubt it not. wife go you to her ere you go to bed. acquaint her here of my son paris' love and bid her mark you me on wednesday next but soft what day is this$paris monday my lord.$capulet monday ha ha. well wednesday is too soon o' thursday let it be.o' thursday tell her she shall be married to this noble earl. will you be ready do you like this haste well keep no great ado a friend or two. for hark you tybalt being slain so late it may be thought we held him carelessly being our kinsman if we revel much. therefore well have some half a dozen friends and there an end. but what say you to thursday$original text$paris my lord i would that thursday were tomorrow.$capulet well get you gone. o' thursday be it then. go you to juliet ere you go to bed. prepare her wife against this wedding day. farewell my lord.light to my chamber ho afore me it is so very late that we may call it early by and by. good night.$exeunt$original text$enter romeo and juliet aloft$juliet wilt thou be gone it is not yet near day. it was the nightingale and not the lark that pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree. believe me love it was the nightingale.$romeo it was the lark the herald of the morn no nightingale. look love what envious streaks do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. nights candles are burnt out and jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. i must be gone and live or stay and die.$juliet yon light is not daylight i know it i. it is some meteor that the sun exhales to be to thee this night a torchbearer and light thee on thy way to mantua. therefore stay yet. thou needst not to be gone.$romeo let me be ta'en. let me be put to death. i am content so thou wilt have it so. ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye. 'tis but the pale reflex of cynthias brow. nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat the vaulty heaven so high above our heads. i have more care to stay than will to go. come death and welcome juliet wills it so. how is t my soul lets talk. it is not day.$original text$juliet it is it is. hie hence be gone away it is the lark that sings so out of tune straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. some say the lark makes sweet division. this doth not so for she divideth us. some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes. oh now i would they had changed voices too since arm from arm that voice doth us affray hunting thee hence with huntsup to the day. o now be gone. more light and light it grows.$romeo more light and light more dark and dark our woes$enter nurse$nurse madam.$juliet nurse$nurse your lady mother is coming to your chamber. the day is broke. be wary look about.$exit nurse$juliet then window let day in and let life out.$romeo farewell farewell. one kiss and ill descend.$kiss. romeo goes down$original text$juliet art thou gone so love lord ay husband friend i must hear from thee every day in the hour for in a minute there are many days. oh by this count i shall be much in years ere i again behold my romeo.$romeo farewell i will omit no opportunity that may convey my greetings love to thee.$juliet oh thinkst thou we shall ever meet again$romeo i doubt it not and all these woes shall serve for sweet discourses in our time to come.$juliet o god i have an illdivining soul. methinks i see thee now thou art so low as one dead in the bottom of a tomb. either my eyesight fails or thou lookst pale.$romeo and trust me love in my eye so do you. dry sorrow drinks our blood. adieu adieu$exit romeo$juliet o fortune fortune all men call thee fickle. if thou art fickle what dost thou with him that is renowned for faith be fickle fortune for then i hope thou wilt not keep him long but send him back.$lady capulet from within ho daughter are you up$original text$juliet who is t that calls is it my lady mother is she not down so late or up so early what unaccustomed cause procures her hither$enter lady capulet$lady capulet why how now juliet$juliet madam i am not well.$lady capulet evermore weeping for your cousins death what wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears an if thou couldst thou couldst not make him live. therefore have done. some grief shows much of love but much of grief shows still some want of wit.$juliet yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.$lady capulet so shall you feel the loss but not the friend which you weep for.$juliet feeling so the loss cannot choose but ever weep the friend.$lady capulet well girl thou weepst not so much for his death as that the villain lives which slaughtered him.$juliet what villain madam$lady capulet that same villain romeo.$original text$juliet aside villain and he be many miles asunder. to lady capulet god pardon him i do with all my heart and yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.$lady capulet that is because the traitor murderer lives.$juliet ay madam from the reach of these my hands. would none but i might venge my cousins death$lady capulet we will have vengeance for it fear thou not. then weep no more. ill send to one in mantua where that same banished runagate doth live shall give him such an unaccustomed dram that he shall soon keep tybalt company. and then i hope thou wilt be satisfied.$juliet indeed i never shall be satisfied with romeo till i behold himdead is my poor heart for a kinsman vexed. madam if you could find out but a man to bear a poison i would temper it that romeo should upon receipt thereof soon sleep in quiet. oh how my heart abhors to hear him named and cannot come to him. to wreak the love i bore my cousin upon his body that slaughtered him$lady capulet find thou the means and ill find such a man. but now ill tell thee joyful tidings girl.$juliet and joy comes well in such a needy time. what are they beseech your ladyship$original text$lady capulet well well thou hast a careful father child. one who to put thee from thy heaviness hath sorted out a sudden day of joy that thou expectst not nor i looked not for.$juliet madam in happy time what day is that$lady capulet marry my child early next thursday morn the gallant young and noble gentleman the county paris at saint peters church shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.$juliet now by saint peters church and peter too he shall not make me there a joyful bride. i wonder at this haste that i must wed ere he that should be husband comes to woo. i pray you tell my lord and father madam i will not marry yet. and when i do i swear it shall be romeo whom you know i hate rather than paris. these are news indeed$lady capulet here comes your father. tell him so yourself and see how he will take it at your hands.$enter capulet and nurse$capulet when the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew but for the sunset of my brothers son it rains downright. how now a conduit girl what still in tears evermore showering in one little body thou counterfeitst a bark a sea a wind for still thy eyes which i may call the sea do ebb and flow with tears. the bark thy body is sailing in this salt flood. the winds thy sighs who raging with thy tears and they with them without a sudden calm will overset thy tempesttossed body.how now wife have you delivered to her our decree$original text$lady capulet ay sir but she will none she gives you thanks. i would the fool were married to her grave$capulet soft take me with you take me with you wife. how will she none doth she not give us thanks is she not proud doth she not count her blessed unworthy as she is that we have wrought so worthy a gentleman to be her bride$juliet not proud you have but thankful that you have. proud can i never be of what i hate but thankful even for hate that is meant love.$capulet how how how how chopped logic what is this proud and i thank you and i thank you not and yet not proud mistress minion you thank me no thankings nor proud me no prouds but fettle your fine joints 'gainst thursday next to go with paris to saint peters church or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither. out you green sickness carrion out you baggage you tallow face$lady capulet fie fie what are you mad$juliet good father i beseech you on my knees hear me with patience but to speak a word.$original text$capulet hang thee young baggage disobedient wretch i tell thee what get thee to church o' thursday or never after look me in the face. speak not. reply not. do not answer me. my fingers itch.wife we scarce thought us blest that god had lent us but this only child but now i see this one is one too much and that we have a curse in having her. out on her hilding$nurse god in heaven bless her you are to blame my lord to rate her so.$capulet and why my lady wisdom hold your tongue good prudence. smatter with your gossips go.$nurse i speak no treason.$capulet oh god 'i' good e'en.$nurse may not one speak$capulet peace you mumbling fool utter your gravity o'er a gossips bowl for here we need it not.$lady capulet you are too hot.$capulet gods bread it makes me mad. day night hour tide time work play alone in company still my care hath been to have her matched. and having now provided a gentleman of noble parentage of fair demesnes youthful and nobly trained stuffed as they say with honorable parts proportioned as ones thought would wish a man and then to have a wretched puling fool a whining mammet in her fortunes tender to answer ill not wed i cannot love i am too young i pray you pardon me. but an you will not wed ill pardon you. graze where you will you shall not house with me. look to t think on t i do not use to jest. thursday is near. lay hand on heart advise. an you be mine ill give you to my friend. an you be not hang beg starve die in the streets for by my soul ill ne'er acknowledge thee nor what is mine shall never do thee good. trust to t bethink you. ill not be forsworn.$original text$exit capulet$juliet is there no pity sitting in the clouds that sees into the bottom of my grief o sweet my mother cast me not away delay this marriage for a month a week. or if you do not make the bridal bed in that dim monument where tybalt lies.$lady capulet talk not to me for ill not speak a word. do as thou wilt for i have done with thee.$exit lady capulet$juliet o godo nurse how shall this be prevented my husband is on earth my faith in heaven. how shall that faith return again to earth unless that husband send it me from heaven by leaving earth comfort me. counsel me. alack alack that heaven should practice stratagems upon so soft a subject as myself. what sayst thou hast thou not a word of joy some comfort nurse.$original text$nurse faith here it is. romeo is banished and all the world to nothing that he dares ne'er come back to challenge you. or if he do it needs must be by stealth. then since the case so stands as now it doth i think it best you married with the county. oh hes a lovely gentleman. romeos a dishclout to him. an eagle madam hath not so green so quick so fair an eye as paris hath. beshrew my very heart i think you are happy in this second match for it excels your first. or if it did not your first is dead or twere as good he were as living here and you no use of him.$juliet speakest thou from thy heart$nurse and from my soul too else beshrew them both.$juliet amen$nurse what$juliet well thou hast comforted me marvelous much. go in and tell my lady i am gone having displeased my father to lawrences cell to make confession and to be absolved.$nurse marry i will and this is wisely done.$exit nurse$original text$juliet ancient damnation o most wicked fiend is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue which she hath praised him with above compare so many thousand times go counselor. thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. ill to the friar to know his remedy. if all else fail myself have power to die.$exit$original text$enter friar lawrence and paris$friar lawrence on thursday sir the time is very short.$paris my father capulet will have it so and i am nothing slow to slack his haste.$friar lawrence you say you do not know the ladys mind. uneven is the course. i like it not.$paris immoderately she weeps for tybalts death and therefore have i little talked of love for venus smiles not in a house of tears. now sir her father counts it dangerous that she do give her sorrow so much sway and in his wisdom hastes our marriage to stop the inundation of her tears which too much minded by herself alone may be put from her by society. now do you know the reason of this haste.$friar lawrence aside i would i knew not why it should be slowed. look sir here comes the lady toward my cell.$enter juliet$paris happily met my lady and my wife.$juliet that may be sir when i may be a wife.$original text$paris that may be must be love on thursday next.$juliet what must be shall be.$friar lawrence thats a certain text.$paris come you to make confession to this father$juliet to answer that i should confess to you.$paris do not deny to him that you love me.$juliet i will confess to you that i love him.$paris so will ye i am sure that you love me.$juliet if i do so it will be of more price being spoke behind your back than to your face.$paris poor soul thy face is much abused with tears.$juliet the tears have got small victory by that for it was bad enough before their spite.$paris thou wrongst it more than tears with that report.$juliet that is no slander sir which is a truth and what i spake i spake it to my face.$paris thy face is mine and thou hast slandered it.$juliet it may be so for it is not mine own. are you at leisure holy father now or shall i come to you at evening mass$original text$friar lawrence my leisure serves me pensive daughter now. my lord we must entreat the time alone.$paris god shield i should disturb devotion juliet on thursday early will i rouse ye. kisses her till then adieu and keep this holy kiss.$exit paris$juliet o shut the door and when thou hast done so come weep with me past hope past cure past help.$friar lawrence o juliet i already know thy grief. it strains me past the compass of my wits. i hear thou must and nothing may prorogue it on thursday next be married to this county.$juliet tell me not friar that thou hearst of this unless thou tell me how i may prevent it. if in thy wisdom thou canst give no help do thou but call my resolution wise and with this knife ill help it presently. shows him a knife god joined my heart and romeos thou our hands. and ere this hand by thee to romeo sealed shall be the label to another deed or my true heart with treacherous revolt turn to another this shall slay them both. therefore out of thy longexperienced time give me some present counsel or behold 'twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife shall play the umpire arbitrating that which the commission of thy years and art could to no issue of true honor bring. be not so long to speak. i long to die if what thou speakst speak not of remedy.$original text$friar lawrence hold daughter. i do spy a kind of hope which craves as desperate an execution as that is desperate which we would prevent. if rather than to marry county paris thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself then is it likely thou wilt undertake a thing like death to chide away this shame that copest with death himself to scape from it. an if thou darest ill give thee remedy.$juliet o bid me leap rather than marry paris from off the battlements of yonder tower or walk in thievish ways or bid me lurk where serpents are chain me with roaring bears or shut me nightly in a charnel house o'ercovered quite with dead mens rattling bones with reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls or bid me go into a newmade grave and hide me with a dead man in his shroud things that to hear them told have made me tremble and i will do it without fear or doubt to live an unstained wife to my sweet love.$friar lawrence hold then. go home be merry. give consent to marry paris. wednesday is tomorrow. tomorrow night look that thou lie alone. let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.  shows her a vial take thou this vial being then in bed and this distilled liquor drink thou off when presently through all thy veins shall run a cold and drowsy humor for no pulse shall keep his native progress but surcease. no warmth no breath shall testify thou livest. the roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade to paly ashes thy eyes' windows fall like death when he shuts up the day of life. each part deprived of supple government shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death. and in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death thou shalt continue two and forty hours and then awake as from a pleasant sleep. now when the bridegroom in the morning comes to rouse thee from thy bed there art thou dead. then as the manner of our country is in thy best robes uncovered on the bier thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault where all the kindred of the capulets lie. in the meantime against thou shalt awake shall romeo by my letters know our drift and hither shall he come and he and i will watch thy waking and that very night shall romeo bear thee hence to mantua. and this shall free thee from this present shame if no inconstant toy nor womanish fear abate thy valor in the acting it.$original text$juliet give me give me o tell not me of fear$friar lawrence  gives her a vial hold. get you gone. be strong and prosperous in this resolve. ill send a friar with speed to mantua with my letters to thy lord.$juliet love give me strength and strength shall help afford. farewell dear father.$exeunt separately$original text$enter capulet lady capulet nurse and two or three servingmen$capulet gives paper to first servingman so many guests invite as here are writ.$exit first servingman$to second servingman sirrah go hire me twenty cunning cooks.$second servingman you shall have none ill sir for ill try if they can lick their fingers.$capulet how canst thou try them so$second servingman marry sir tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.$capulet go be gone. we shall be much unfurnished for this time.$exit second servingman$what is my daughter gone to friar lawrence$nurse ay forsooth.$capulet well he may chance to do some good on her. a peevish selfwilled harlotry it is.$enter juliet$original text$nurse see where she comes from shrift with merry look.$capulet how now my headstrong where have you been gadding$juliet where i have learned me to repent the sin of disobedient opposition to you and your behests and am enjoined by holy lawrence to fall prostrate here to beg your pardon. falls to her knees pardon i beseech you henceforward i am ever ruled by you.$capulet send for the county. go tell him of this. ill have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.$juliet i met the youthful lord at lawrence' cell and gave him what becomed love i might not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.$capulet why i am glad on t. this is well. stand up.$juliet stands up$this is as t should be.let me see the county. ay marry go i say and fetch him hither. now afore god this reverend holy friar our whole city is much bound to him.$juliet nurse will you go with me into my closet to help me sort such needful ornaments as you think fit to furnish me tomorrow$original text$lady capulet no not till thursday. there is time enough.$capulet go nurse. go with her. well to church tomorrow.$exeunt juliet and nurse$lady capulet we shall be short in our provision. 'tis now near night.$capulet tush i will stir about and all things shall be well i warrant thee wife. go thou to juliet help to deck up her. ill not to bed tonight. let me alone. ill play the housewife for this once.$lady capulet exits.$what ho they are all forthwell i will walk myself to county paris to prepare him up against tomorrow. my heart is wondrous light since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.$exit$original text$enter juliet and nurse$juliet ay those attires are best. but gentle nurse i pray thee leave me to myself tonight for i have need of many orisons to move the heavens to smile upon my state which well thou knowst is cross and full of sin.$enter lady capulet$lady capulet what are you busy ho need you my help$juliet no madam. we have culled such necessaries as are behooveful for our state tomorrow. so please you let me now be left alone and let the nurse this night sit up with you. for i am sure you have your hands full all in this so sudden business.$lady capulet good night. get thee to bed and rest for thou hast need.$exeunt lady capulet and nurse$juliet farewellgod knows when we shall meet again. i have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins that almost freezes up the heat of life. ill call them back again to comfort me. nursewhat should she do here$original text$my dismal scene i needs must act alone. come vial. holds out the vial what if this mixture do not work at all shall i be married then tomorrow morning no no. this shall forbid it. lie thou there. lays her knife down what if it be a poison which the friar subtly hath ministered to have me dead lest in this marriage he should be dishonored because he married me before to romeo i fear it is. and yet methinks it should not for he hath still been tried a holy man. how if when i am laid into the tomb i wake before the time that romeo come to redeem me theres a fearful point. shall i not then be stifled in the vault to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in and there die strangled ere my romeo comes or if i live is it not very like the horrible conceit of death and night together with the terror of the place as in a vault an ancient receptacle where for these many hundred years the bones of all my buried ancestors are packed where bloody tybalt yet but green in earth lies festering in his shroud where as they say at some hours in the night spirits resort alack alack is it not like that i so early waking what with loathsome smells and shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth that living mortals hearing them run mad$original text$oh if i wake shall i not be distraught environed with all these hideous fears and madly play with my forefathers joints and pluck the mangled tybalt from his shroud and in this rage with some great kinsmans bone as with a club dash out my desperate brains oh look methinks i see my cousins ghost seeking out romeo that did spit his body upon a rapiers point. stay tybalt stay romeo romeo romeo heres drink. i drink to thee.$she drinks and falls down on the bed hidden by the bed curtains$original text$enter lady capulet and nurse$lady capulet hold take these keys and fetch more spices nurse.$nurse they call for dates and quinces in the pastry.$enter capulet$capulet come stir stir stir the second cock hath crowed. the curfew bell hath rung. 'tis three o'clock. look to the baked meats good angelica. spare not for the cost.$nurse go you cotquean go. get you to bed faith. youll be sick tomorrow for this nights watching.$capulet no not a whit what. i have watched ere now all night for lesser cause and ne'er been sick.$lady capulet ay you have been a mousehunt in your time but i will watch you from such watching now.$exeunt lady capulet and nurse$capulet a jealous hood a jealous hood$enter three or four servingmen with spits and logs and baskets$now fellow what is there$original text$first servingman things for the cook sir but i know not what.$capulet make haste make haste sirrah.$exit first servingman$to second servingman fetch drier logs. call peter. he will show thee where they are.$second servingman i have a head sir that will find out logs and never trouble peter for the matter.$exit second servingman$capulet mass and well said. a merry whoreson ha thou shalt be loggerhead.good faith tis day. the county will be here with music straight for so he said he would. i hear him near.$music plays within$nurse wife what ho what nurse i say$enter nurse$go waken juliet. go and trim her up. ill go and chat with paris. hie make haste make haste. the bridegroom he is come already. make haste i say.$exeunt$original text$enter nurse$nurse mistress what mistress julietfast i warrant her she. why lamb why lady fie you slugabed. why love i say. madam sweetheart why bride what not a word you take your pennyworths now. sleep for a week for the next night i warrant the county paris hath set up his rest that you shall rest but little.god forgive me marry and amen. how sound is she asleep i must needs wake her.madam madam madam ay let the county take you in your bed. hell fright you up i' faith. will it not be opens the bed curtains what dressed and in your clothes and down again i must needs wake you. lady lady lady alas alas help help my ladys dead oh welladay that ever i was born some aqua vitae homy lord my lady$enter lady capulet$lady capulet what noise is here$nurse o lamentable day$lady capulet what is the matter$nurse look look. o heavy day$original text$lady capulet o me o me my child my only life revive look up or i will die with thee help help call help.$enter capulet$capulet for shame bring juliet forth. her lord is come.$nurse shes dead deceased shes dead. alack the day$lady capulet alack the day. shes dead shes dead shes dead$capulet ha let me see her. out alas shes cold. her blood is settled and her joints are stiff. life and these lips have long been separated. death lies on her like an untimely frost upon the sweetest flower of all the field.$nurse o lamentable day$lady capulet o woeful time.$capulet death that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.$enter friar lawrence county paris and musicians$friar lawrence come is the bride ready to go to church$capulet ready to go but never to return. o son the night before thy wedding day hath death lain with thy wife. there she lies flower as she was deflowered by him.$original text$death is my soninlaw. death is my heir. my daughter he hath wedded. i will die and leave him all. life living all is deaths.$paris have i thought long to see this mornings face and doth it give me such a sight as this$lady capulet accursed unhappy wretched hateful day most miserable hour that e'er time saw in lasting labor of his pilgrimage. but one poor one one poor and loving child but one thing to rejoice and solace in and cruel death hath catched it from my sight$nurse o woe o woeful woeful woeful day most lamentable day most woeful day that ever ever i did yet behold o day o day o day o hateful day never was seen so black a day as this. o woeful day o woeful day$paris beguiled divorced wronged spited slain most detestable death by thee beguiled by cruel cruel thee quite overthrown o love o life not life but love in death.$capulet despised distressed hated martyred killed uncomfortable time why camest thou now to murder murder our solemnity o child o child my soul and not my child dead art thou alack my child is dead and with my child my joys are buried.$friar lawrence peace ho for shame confusions cure lives not in these confusions. heaven and yourself had part in this fair maid. now heaven hath all$original text$and all the better is it for the maid. your part in her you could not keep from death but heaven keeps his part in eternal life. the most you sought was her promotion for twas your heaven she should be advanced. and weep ye now seeing she is advanced above the clouds as high as heaven itself oh in this love you love your child so ill that you run mad seeing that she is well. shes not well married that lives married long but shes best married that dies married young. dry up your tears and stick your rosemary on this fair corse and as the custom is and in her best array bear her to church. for though some nature bids us all lament yet natures tears are reasons merriment.$capulet all things that we ordained festival turn from their office to black funeral. our instruments to melancholy bells our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast. our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse and all things change them to the contrary.$friar lawrence sir go you in and madam go with him and go sir paris. every one prepare to follow this fair corse unto her grave. the heavens do lour upon you for some ill. move them no more by crossing their high will.$exeunt capulet lady capulet paris and friar lawrence$first musician faith we may put up our pipes and be gone.$original text$nurse honest good fellows ah put up put up for well you know this is a pitiful case.$exit$first musician ay by my troth the case may be amended.$enter peter$peter musicians o musicians hearts ease hearts ease. o an you will have me live play hearts ease.$first musician why hearts ease$peter o musicians because my heart itself plays my heart is full. o play me some merry dump to comfort me.$first musician not a dump we. 'tis no time to play now.$peter you will not then$first musician no.$peter i will then give it you soundly.$first musician what will you give us$peter no money on my faith but the gleek. i will give you the minstrel.$first musician then i will give you the serving creature.$original text$peter then will i lay the serving creatures dagger on your pate. i will carry no crotchets. ill re you ill fa you. do you note me$first musician an you re us and fa us you note us.$second musician pray you put up your dagger and put out your wit.$peter then have at you with my wit. i will drybeat you with an iron wit and put up my iron dagger. answer me like men.$sings when griping grief the heart doth wound and doleful dumps the mind oppress then music with her silver sound$speaks why silver sound why music with her silver sound what say you simon catling$first musican marry sir because silver hath a sweet sound.$peter prates.what say you hugh rebeck$second musician i say silver sound because musicians sound for silver.$peter prates too.what say you james soundpost$third musician faith i know not what to say.$original text$peter oh i cry you mercy you are the singer. i will say for you. it is music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold for sounding.$sings then music with her silver sound with speedy help doth lend redress.$exit peter$first musician what a pestilent knave is this same$second musician hang him jack come well in here tarry for the mourners and stay dinner.$exeunt$original text$enter romeo$romeo if i may trust the flattering truth of sleep my dreams presage some joyful news at hand. my bosoms lord sits lightly in his throne and all this day an unaccustomed spirit lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. i dreamt my lady came and found me dead strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think and breathed such life with kisses in my lips that i revived and was an emperor. ah me how sweet is love itself possessed when but loves shadows are so rich in joy$enter romeos man balthasar$news from veronahow now balthasar dost thou not bring me letters from the friar how doth my lady is my father well how fares my juliet that i ask again for nothing can be ill if she be well.$balthasar then she is well and nothing can be ill. her body sleeps in capels' monument and her immortal part with angels lives. i saw her laid low in her kindreds vault and presently took post to tell it you. o pardon me for bringing these ill news since you did leave it for my office sir.$original text$romeo is it e'en so then i defy you stars thou knowst my lodging. get me ink and paper and hire post horses. i will hence tonight.$balthasar i do beseech you sir have patience. your looks are pale and wild and do import some misadventure.$romeo tush thou art deceived. leave me and do the thing i bid thee do. hast thou no letters to me from the friar$balthasar no my good lord.$romeo no matter. get thee gone and hire those horses. ill be with thee straight.$exit balthasar$well juliet i will lie with thee tonight. lets see for means. o mischief thou art swift to enter in the thoughts of desperate men i do remember an apothecary and hereabouts he dwellswhich late i noted in tattered weeds with overwhelming brows culling of simples. meager were his looks sharp misery had worn him to the bones and in his needy shop a tortoise hung an alligator stuffed and other skins of illshaped fishes and about his shelves a beggarly account of empty boxes green earthen pots bladders and musty seeds remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses were thinly scattered to make up a show.$original text$noting this penury to myself i said an if a man did need a poison now whose sale is present death in mantua here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him. oh this same thought did but forerun my need and this same needy man must sell it me. as i remember this should be the house. being holiday the beggars shop is shut. what ho apothecary$enter apothecary$apothecary who calls so loud$romeo come hither man. i see that thou art poor. hold there is forty ducats. let me have a dram of poison such soonspeeding gear as will disperse itself through all the veins that the lifeweary taker may fall dead and that the trunk may be discharged of breath as violently as hasty powder fired doth hurry from the fatal cannons womb.$apothecary such mortal drugs i have but mantuas law is death to any he that utters them.$romeo art thou so bare and full of wretchedness and fearst to die famine is in thy cheeks. need and oppression starveth in thine eyes. contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. the world is not thy friend nor the worlds law. the world affords no law to make thee rich. then be not poor but break it and take this. holds out money$original text$apothecary my poverty but not my will consents.$romeo i pay thy poverty and not thy will.$apothecary  gives romeo poison put this in any liquid thing you will and drink it off and if you had the strength of twenty men it would dispatch you straight.$romeo gives apothecary money there is thy gold worse poison to mens souls doing more murder in this loathsome world than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. i sell thee poison. thou hast sold me none. farewell. buy food and get thyself in flesh. come cordial and not poison go with me to juliets grave for there must i use thee.$exeunt$original text$enter friar john$friar john holy franciscan friar brother ho$enter friar lawrence$friar lawrence this same should be the voice of friar john. welcome from mantua. what says romeo or if his mind be writ give me his letter.$friar john going to find a barefoot brother out one of our order to associate me here in this city visiting the sick and finding him the searchers of the town suspecting that we both were in a house where the infectious pestilence did reign sealed up the doors and would not let us forth. so that my speed to mantua there was stayed.$friar lawrence who bare my letter then to romeo$friar john i could not send ithere it is again  gives friar lawrence a letter nor get a messenger to bring it thee so fearful were they of infection.$friar lawrence unhappy fortune by my brotherhood the letter was not nice but full of charge of dear import and the neglecting it may do much danger. friar john go hence. get me an iron crow and bring it straight unto my cell.$original text$friar john brother ill go and bring it thee.$exit friar john$friar lawrence now must i to the monument alone. within this three hours will fair juliet wake. she will beshrew me much that romeo hath had no notice of these accidents. but i will write again to mantua and keep her at my cell till romeo come. poor living corse closed in a dead mans tomb$exit$original text$enter paris and his page$paris give me thy torch boy. hence and stand aloof. yet put it out for i would not be seen. under yon yew trees lay thee all along holding thine ear close to the hollow ground so shall no foot upon the churchyard tread being loose unfirm with digging up of graves but thou shalt hear it. whistle then to me as signal that thou hearst something approach. give me those flowers. do as i bid thee go.$page extinguishes torch gives paris flowers$page aside i am almost afraid to stand alone here in the churchyard. yet i will adventure.$page moves aside$paris scatters flowers at juliet's closed tomb sweet flower with flowers thy bridal bed i strew o woe thy canopy is dust and stones which with sweet water nightly i will dew. or wanting that with tears distilled by moans the obsequies that i for thee will keep nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.$page whistles$the boy gives warning something doth approach. what cursed foot wanders this way tonight to cross my obsequies and true loves rite what with a torch muffle me night awhile.$