modern text$theseus and hippolyta enter with philostrate and others.$theseus our wedding day is almost here my beautiful hippolyta. well be getting married in four days on the day of the new moon. but it seems to me that the days are passing too slowlythe old moon is taking too long to fade away that old slow moon is keeping me from getting what i want just like an old widow makes her stepson wait to get his inheritance.$hippolyta no youll see four days will quickly turn into four nights. and since we dream at night time passes quickly then. finally the new moon curved like a silver bow in the sky will look down on our wedding celebration.$theseus go philostrate get the young people of athens ready to celebrate and have a good time. sadness is only appropriate for funerals. we dont want it at our festivities.$philostrate exits.$hippolyta i wooed you with violence using my sword and got you to fall in love with me by injuring you. but ill marry you under different circumstanceswith extravagant festivals public festivities and celebration.$egeus enters with his daughter hermia and lysander and demetrius.$egeus long live theseus our famous and respected duke$modern text$theseus thanks good egeus. whats new with you$egeus im here full of anger to complain about my daughter hermia.step forward demetrius.my lord this man demetrius has my permission to marry her.step forward lysander.but this other man lysander has cast a magic spell over my childs heart.you you lysander youve given her poems and exchanged tokens of love with my daughter. youve pretended to be in love with her singing fake love songs softly at her window by moonlight and youve captured her imagination by giving her locks of your hair rings toys trinkets knickknacks little presents flowers and candiesthings that can really influence an impressionable young person. youve connived to steal my daughters heart making her stubborn and harsh instead of obedient like she should be.and my gracious duke if she wont agree to marry demetrius right now i ask you to let me exercise the right that all fathers have in athens. since she belongs to me i can do what i want with heras the law says i can either make her marry demetriusor have her killed.$theseus what do you have to say for yourself hermia think carefully pretty girl. you should think of your father as a god since hes the one who gave you your beauty. to him youre like a figure that hes sculpted out of wax and he has the power to keep that figure intact or to disfigure it. demetrius is an admirable man.$modern text$hermia so is lysander.$theseus youre right lysanders admirable too. but since your father doesnt want him to marry you you have to consider demetrius to be the better man.$hermia i wish my father could see them with my eyes.$theseus no you must see them as your father sees them.$hermia your grace please forgive me. i dont know what makes me think i can say this and i dont know if speaking my mind to such a powerful and noble person as yourself will damage my reputation for modesty. but please tell me the worst thing that could happen to me if i refuse to marry demetrius.$theseus youll either be executed or youll never see another man again. so think carefully about what you want beautiful hermia. consider how young you are and question your feelings. then decide whether you could stand to be a nun wearing a priestesss habit and caged up in a cloister forever living your entire life without a husband or children weakly chanting hymns to the cold and virginal goddess of the moon. people who can restrain their passions and stay virgins forever are holy. but although a virgin priestess might be rewarded in heaven a married woman is happier on earth. a married woman is like a rose who is picked and made into a beautiful perfume while a priestess just withers away on the stem.$modern text$hermia id rather wither away than give up my virginity to someone i dont love.$theseus take some time to think about this. by the time of the next new moonthe day when hippolyta and i will be marriedbe ready either to be executed for disobeying your father to marry demetrius as your father wishes or to take a vow to spend the rest of your life as a virgin priestess of the moon goddess.$demetrius please give in sweet hermia.and lysander stop acting like shes yours. ive got more of a right to her than you do.$lysander her father loves you demetrius. so why dont you marry him and let me have hermia$egeus its true rude lysander i do love him. thats why im giving him my daughter. shes mine and im giving her to demetrius.$lysander to theseus my lord im just as noble and rich as he is. i love hermia more than he does. my prospects are as good as his if not better. and beautiful hermia loves mewhich is more important than all those other things im bragging about. why shouldnt i be able to marry her demetriusand ill say this to his facecourted nedars daughter helena and made her fall in love with him. that sweet lady helena loves devoutly. she adores this horrible and unfaithful man.$modern text$theseus i have to admit ive heard something about that and meant to ask demetrius about it but i was too busy with personal matters and it slipped my mind.anyway demetrius and egeus both of you come with me. i want to say a few things to you in private.as for you beautiful hermia get ready to do what your father wants because otherwise the law says that you must die or become a nun and theres nothing i can do about that.come with me hippolyta. how are you my lovedemetrius and egeus come with us. i want you to do some things for our wedding and i also want to discuss something that concerns you both.$egeus were following you not only because it is our duty but also because we want to.$they all exit except lysander and hermia.$lysander whats going on my love why are you so pale why have your rosy cheeks faded so quickly$hermia probably because my cheeks' roses needed rain which i could easily give them with all the tears in my eyes.$lysander oh honey listen in books they say that true love always faces obstacles. either the lovers have different social standings$modern text$hermia oh what an obstacle that would be imagine being too high on the social ladder and falling in love with someone beneath you.$lysander or else they were very different ages$hermia how awful being too old to marry someone young.$lysander or else their guardians and advisors said no$hermia what hell to have your love life determined by someone else$lysander or even if the lovers are a good match their love might be ruined by war death or sickness so that the affair only lasts an instant. their time together might be as fleeting as a shadow or as short as a dream lasting only as long as it takes a lightning bolt to flash across the sky. before you can say look its gone. thats how intense things like love are quickly destroyed.$hermia if true lovers are always thwarted then it must be a rule of fate. so lets try to be patient as we deal with our problem. its as normal a part of love as dreams sighs wishes and tears.$lysander thats the right attitude. so listen hermia. i have an aunt who is a widow whos very rich and doesnt have any children. she lives about twenty miles from athens and she thinks of me as a son. i could marry you there gentle hermia where the strict laws of athens cant touch us. so heres the plan. if you love me sneak out of your fathers house tomorrow night and meet me in the forest a few miles outside of town.$modern text$you remember the placei met you there once with helena to celebrate may day.ill wait for you there.$hermia oh lysander i swear ill be there tomorrow. i swear by cupids strongest bow and his best goldtipped arrow by the goddess of loves innocent doves by everything that ties lovers together by the bonfire where queen dido burned herself to death when her lover aeneas jilted her and by all the promises that men have broken and men have broken more promises than women have ever made. i give you my word i will meet you at that spot tomorrow.$lysander keep your promise my love. look here comes helena.$helena enters.$hermia hello beautiful helena where are you going$helena did you just call me beautiful take it back. youre the beautiful one as far as demetrius is concerned. oh youre so lucky your eyes are like stars and your voice is more musical than a larks song is to a shepherd in the springtime. sickness is contagiousi wish beauty were contagious too i would catch your good looks before i left. my ear would be infected by your voice my eye by your eye and my tongue would come down with a bad case of your melodious speech. if the world were mine id give it all upeverything except demetriusto be you.$modern text$oh teach me how you look the way you do and which tricks you used to make demetrius fall in love with you.$hermia i frown at him but he still loves me.$helena oh if only my smiles could inspire love as effectively as your frowns$hermia i curse him but he loves me.$helena if only my prayers could inspire that kind of affection$hermia the more i hate him the more he follows me around.$helena the more i love him the more he hates me.$hermia its not my fault he acts like that helena.$helena thats true its your beautys fault. i wish i had a fault like that$hermia dont worry. he wont see my face ever again. lysander and i are running away from here. before i saw lysander athens seemed like paradise to me. but lysanders so attractive that hes turned heaven into hell$lysander helena well tell you about our secret plan. tomorrow night when the moon shines on the water and decorates the grass with tiny beads of pearly light the time of night that always hides runaway lovers we plan to sneak out of athens.$hermia to helena in the woods where you and i used to lounge around on the pale primroses telling each other sweet secretsthats where lysander and i will meet.$modern text$from then on well turn our backs on athens. well look for new friends and keep the company of strangers. goodbye old friend. pray for us and i hope you win over demetriuskeep your promise lysander. we need to stay away from each other until midnight tomorrow.$lysander i will my hermia.$hermia exits.$goodbye helena. i hope demetrius comes to love you as much as you love him$lysander exits.$helena its amazing how much happier some people are than others people throughout athens think im as beautiful as hermia. but so what demetrius doesnt think so and thats all that matters. he refuses to admit what everyone else knows. but even though hes making a mistake by obsessing over hermia so much im also making a mistake since i obsess over him. love can make worthless things beautiful. when were in love we dont see with our eyes but with our minds. thats why paintings of cupid the god of love always show him as blind. and love doesnt have good judgment eithercupid has wings and no eyes so hes bound to be reckless and hasty. thats why they say love is a child. because it makes such bad choices. just as boys like to play games by telling lies cupid breaks his promises all the time. before demetrius ever saw hermia he showered me with promises and swore hed be mine forever.$modern text$but when he got all hot and bothered over hermia his promises melted away. ill go tell demetrius that hermia is running away tomorrow night. hell run after her. if hes grateful to me for this information itll be worth my pain in helping him pursue my rival hermia. at least ill get to see him when he goes and then again when he comes back.$hermia exits.$modern text$quince the carpenter enters with snug the cabinetmaker bottom the weaver flute the bellowsrepairman snout the handyman and starveling the tailor.$quince is everyone here$bottom you should call their names generally bottom means individually not generally. bottom frequently makes mistakes with words. generally one person at a time in the order in which their names appear on this piece of paper.$quince this is a list of the names of all the men in athens who are good enough to act in the play were going to perform for the duke and duchess on their wedding night.$bottom first peter quince tell us what the play is about then read the names of the actors and then shut up.$quince all right. our play is called a very tragic comedy about the horrible deaths of pyramus and thisbe.$bottom let me tell you its a great piece of work and veryfunny.now peter quince call the names of the actors on the list. men gather around him.$quince answer when i call your name.nick bottom the weaver$bottom here. tell me which part im going to play then go on.$quince you nick bottom have been cast as pyramus.$modern text$bottom whats pyramus a lover or a tyrant$quince a lover who kills himself very nobly for love.$bottom ill have to cry to make my performance believable. and as soon as i start crying oh boy the audience had better watch out because theyll start crying too. ill make tears pour out of their eyes like rainstorms. ill moan very believably.name the other actors.but im really in the mood to play a tyrant. i could do a great job with hercules or any other part that requires ranting and raving. i would rant and rave really well. like this listen. the raging rocks nd shivering shocks will break the locks of prison gates. and the sungods car will shine from far away and make and mar foolish fate. oh that was truly inspirednow tell us who the other actors are.by the way my performance just now was in the style of hercules the tyrant style. a lover would have to be weepier of course.$quince francis flute the bellowsrepairman$flute here peter quince.$quince flute youll be playing the role of thisbe.$modern text$flute whos thisbe a knight on a quest$quince thisbe is the lady pyramus is in love with.$flute no come on dont make me play a woman. im growing a beard.$quince that doesnt matter. youll wear a mask and you can make your voice as high as you want to.$bottom in that case if i can wear a mask let me play thisbe too ill be pyramus first thisne thisneand then in falsetto ah pyramus my dear lover im your dear thisbe your dear lady$quince no no. bottom youre pyramus.and flute youre thisbe.$bottom all right. go on.$quince robin starveling the tailor$starveling here peter quince.$quince robin starveling youre going to play thisbes mother.tom snout the handyman.$snout here peter quince.$quince youll be pyramuss fatherill play thisbes father myselfsnug the cabinetmaker youll play the part of the lion.so thats everyone. i hope this play is well cast now.$modern text$snug do you have the lions part written down if you do please give it to me because i need to start learning the lines. it takes me a long time to learn things.$quince you can improvise the whole thing. its just roaring.$bottom let me play the lion too. ill roar so well that itll be an inspiration to anyone who hears me. ill roar so well that the duke will say let him roar again. let him roar again.$quince if you roar too ferociously youll scare the duchess and the other ladies and make them scream. and that would get us all executed.$all yeah that would get every single one of us executed.$bottom well my friends youve got to admit that if you scare the living daylights out of the ladies theyd have no choice but to execute us. but ill soften my voiceyou know aggravate aggravate is a mistake for moderate. aggravate it so to speakso that ill roar as gently as a baby dove. ill roar like a sweet peaceful nightingale.$quince you cant play any part except pyramus. because pyramus is a goodlooking man the most handsome man that you could find on a summers day a lovely gentlemanly man. so youre the only one who could play pyramus.$bottom well then ill do it. what kind of beard should i wear for the part$quince whatever kind you want i guess.$modern text$bottom ill play the part wearing either a strawcolored beard or a sandy beard or a red beard or one of those bright yellow beards thats the color of a french coin.$quince some french people dont have beards at all because syphilis has made all their hair fall out so you might have to play the part cleanshaven.but gentlemen here are your scripts and i beg you to please learn them by tomorrow night. meet me in the dukes forest a mile outside of town. its best to rehearse there because if we do it here in the city well be bothered by crowds of people and everyone will know the plot of our play. meanwhile ill make a list of props that well need for the play. now make sure you show up all of you. dont leave me in the lurch.$bottom well be there and there well rehearse courageously and wonderfully truly obscenely. work hard know your lines. goodbye.$quince well meet at the giant oak tree in the dukes forest.$bottom got it be there or dont show your face again.$they all exit.$modern text$a fairy and robin goodfellow a puck or mischievous spirit meet onstage.$robin hello spirit where are you going$fairy i go over hills and valleys through bushes and thorns over parks and fencedin spaces through water and fire. i wander everywhere faster than the moon revolves around the earth. i work for titania the fairy queen and organize fairy dances for her in the grass. the cowslip flowers are her bodyguards. youll see that their petals have spots on themthose are rubies fairy gifts. their sweet smells come from those little freckles. now i have to go find some dewdrops and hang a pearl earring on every cowslip flower. goodbye you dumb old spirit. ive got to go. the queen and her elves will be here soon.$robin the kings having a party here tonight. just make sure the queen doesnt come anywhere near him because king oberon is extremely angry. hes furious because she stole an adorable boy from an indian king. shes never kidnapped such a darling human child before and oberons jealous. he wants the child for himself to accompany him on his wanderings through the wild forests. but the queen refuses to hand the boy over to oberon. instead she puts flowers in the boys hair and makes a fuss over him.$modern text$and now oberon and titania refuse to speak to each other or meet each other anywhereneither in the forest nor on the plain nor by the river nor under the stars. they always argue and the little fairies get so frightened that they hide in acorn cups and wont come out.$fairy unless im mistaken youre that mischievous and naughty spirit named robin goodfellow. arent you the one who goes around scaring the maidens in the village stealing the cream from the top of the milk screwing up the flour mills and frustrating housewives by keeping their milk from turning into butter arent you the one who keeps beer from foaming up as it should and causes people to get lost at night while you laugh at them some people call you hobgoblin and sweet puck and youre nice to them. you do their work for them and give them good luck. thats you right$robin what you say is true. thats me youre talking about the playful wanderer of the night. i tell jokes to oberon and make him smile. ill trick a fat wellfed horse into thinking that im a young female horse. sometimes i hide at the bottom of an old womans drink disguised as an apple. when she takes a sip i bob up against her lips and make her spill the drink all over her withered old neck. sometimes a wise old woman with a sad story to tell tries to sit down on me thinking im a threelegged stool. but i slip from underneath her and she falls down crying ow my butt and starts coughing and then everyone laughs and has fun. but step aside fairy here comes oberon.$fairy and heres my mistress titania. i wish hed go away$modern text$oberon the fairy king and his followers enter. on the opposite side of the stage titania the fairy queen and her followers enter.$oberon how not nice to see you titania.$titania what are you jealous oberonfairies lets get out of here. ive sworn ill never sleep with him or talk to him again.$oberon wait just a minute you brazen hussy. arent you supposed to obey me your lord and husband$titania if youre my lord and husband i must be your lady and wife so youre supposed to be faithful to me. but i know for a fact that you snuck away from fairyland disguised as a shepherd and spent all day playing straw pipes and singing love poems to your new girlfriend. the only reason you left india was to come here and see that butch amazon hippolyta. she was your bootwearing mistress and your warrior lover and now that shes getting married to theseus youve come to celebrate their marriage.$oberon how can you stand there shamelessly talking about me and hippolyta when you know that i know about your love for theseus werent you the one who made him desert perigouna in the middle of the night right after hed raped her and werent you the one who made him cheat on all of his other girlfriends like aegles ariadne and antiopa$modern text$titania these are nothing but jealous lies. since the beginning of midsummer my fairies and i havent been able to meet anywhere to do our dances in the wind without being disturbed by you and your arguments. we havent been able to meet on a hill or in a valley in the forest or a meadow by a pebbly fountain or a rushing stream or on the beach by the ocean without you disturbing us. and because you interrupt us so that we cant dance for them the winds have made fogs rise up out of the sea and fall down on the rivers so that the rivers flood just to get revenge on you. so all the work that oxen and farmers have done in plowing the fields has been for nothing because the unripe grain has rotted before it was ripe. sheep pens are empty in the middle of the flooded fields and the crows get fat from eating the dead bodies of infected sheep. all the fields where people usually play games are filled with mud and you cant even see the elaborate mazes that people create in the grass because no one walks in them anymore and theyve all grown over. its not winter here for the human mortals so theyre not protected by the holy hymns and carols that they sing in winter. so the pale angry moon who controls the tides fills the air with diseases. as a consequence of this bad weather and these bad moods the seasons have started to change. cold frosts spread over the red roses and the icy winter wears a crown of sweet summer flowers as some sick joke. spring summer fertile autumn and angry winter have all changed places and now the confused world doesnt know which is which. and this is all because of our argument. we are responsible for this.$modern text$oberon do something about it then. you have the power to fix it. why would titania want to argue with her oberon all im asking for is to have that little human boy as part of my crew.$titania get over it. i wont give up this child for all of fairyland. his mother was one of my worshippers and we always used to gossip together at night in india sitting together by the ocean and watching the merchant ships sailing on the ocean. we used to laugh to see the sails fill up with wind so that they looked like they had big pregnant bellies as if the wind had gotten them pregnant. she would imitate themsince she was already pregnant with the little boyand she would go sailing over the land herself to go get me little presents and come back carrying gifts like she was a ship coming back from a voyage. but since she was a mortal she died giving birth to that boy and for her sake im raising him and will not give him up.$oberon how long do you plan to stay here in this forest$titania maybe until after theseuss wedding day. if you behave yourself and join us in our circle dance and moonlight celebrations then you can come with us. if not leave me alone and ill stay away from your turf.$oberon give me that boy and ill come with you.$titania not for your entire fairy kingdom.come fairies lets go. were going to have an outandout brawl if i stay any longer.$titania and her fairies exit.$modern text$oberon well go on your way then. you wont leave this grove until ive paid you back for this insult. to robin goodfellow my dear puck come here. you remember the time when i was sitting on a cliff and i heard a mermaid sitting on a dolphins back sing such a sweet and harmonious song that it calmed the stormy sea and made stars shoot out of the sky so they could hear her better$robin yes i remember.$oberon that same night i saw cupid flying from the moon to the earth with all of his arrows ready. you couldnt see him but i could. he took aim at a beautiful young virgin who was sitting on a throne in the western part of the world and he shot his arrow of love well enough to have pierced a hundred thousand hearts. but i could see that cupids fiery arrow was put out by watery virginal moonbeams so the royal virgin continued her virginal thoughts without being interrupted by thoughts of love. but i paid attention to where cupids arrow fell. it fell on a little western flower which used to be white as milk but now has turned purple from being wounded by the arrow of love. young girls call it loveinidleness. bring me that flower. i showed it to you once. if its juice is put on someones eyelids while theyre asleep that person will fall in love with the next living creature he or she sees. bring me this plant and get back here before the sea monster has time to swim three miles.$robin i could go around the world in forty minutes.$modern text$robin exits.$oberon when i have the juice of that flower ill trickle some drops of it on titanias eyes while shes sleeping. shell fall madly in love with the first thing she sees when she wakes upeven if its a lion a bear a wolf a bull a monkey or an ape. and before i make her normal againi can cure her by treating her with another plantill make her give me that little boy as my page. but whos that coming this way ill make myself invisible and listen to their conversation.$demetrius enters followed by helena.$demetrius look i dont love you so stop following me around. where are lysander and beautiful hermia lysander i want to stop but hermia stops my heart from beating. you told me they escaped into this forest. and here i am going crazy in the middle of the woods because i cant find my hermia. go away get out of here and stop following me.$helena you attract me to you you cruel magnet but you must not attract iron because my heart is as true as steel. if you let go of your power to attract me i wont have any power to follow you.$demetrius do i ask you to follow me do i speak to you kindly dont i tell you in the clearest terms that i do not and cannot love you$modern text$helena yes but that makes me love you even more. im your little dog demetrius. the more you beat me the more ill love you. treat me like you would treat a dogkick me hit me neglect me try to lose me. just let me follow behind you even though im not good enough for you. could i ask for a worse place in your heart than to be treated as you would treat a dog and yet i would consider it an honor to be your dog.$demetrius dont push it. just looking at you makes me sick.$helena and i get sick when i cant look at you.$demetrius youre risking your reputation by leaving the city and stalking someone who doesnt love you. standing around alone in a deserted area in the middle of the night isnt the best way to protect your virginity.$helena i rely on your virtue to protect me. and because i can see your shining face it doesnt feel like nighttime to me. this forest doesnt seem deserted when youre here because you are all the world to me. so how can anyone say im alone when the whole world is here to look at me$demetrius ill run away from you and hide in the bushes and leave you to the mercy of wild animals.$helena the wildest animal isnt as cruel as you are. run whenever you want to. the story of daphne and apollo will be changed$modern text$the lustful god apollo runs away from the virginal nymph daphne who pursues him the dove chases after the griffin which is usually its predator and the gentle deer tries to hunt down the tigerspeed is useless when the cowardly person chases and the brave person runs away.$demetrius im not sticking around to listen to you any longer. leave me alone. or if you follow me youd better understand that ill do something bad to you in the forest.$helena yes you already hurt me in the church in the town and in the fields. shame on you demetrius your behavior is an insult to all women. we cannot fight for love as men can. we should be pursued and courted. we werent made to do the pursuing.$demetrius exits.$ill follow you and turn this hell im in into a kind of heaven. it would be heavenly to be killed by someone i love so much.$helena exits.$oberon goodbye nymph. before he leaves this part of the forest youll change places youll be the one running away and hell be in love with you.$robin enters.$do you have the flower welcome traveler.$robin yes here it is.$oberon please give it to me. he takes the flower from robin i know a place where wild thyme blooms and oxlips and violets grow. its covered over with luscious honeysuckle sweet muskroses and sweetbrier.$modern text$titania sleeps there sometimes at night lulled to sleep among the flowers by dances and other delights. snakes shed their skin there and the shed skin is wide enough to wrap a fairy in. ill put the juice of this flower on titanias eyes and fill her with horrible delusions and desires. he gives robin part of the flower you take some of it too and look around in this part of the forest. a sweet athenian lady is in love with a young man who wants nothing to do with her. put some of this flowers juice on his eyes and make sure to do it in such a way that the next thing he sees will be the lady. youll be able to tell its him because hes wearing athenian clothes. do it carefully so that hell end up loving her more than she loves him. and then make sure to meet me before the roosters first crow at dawn.$robin dont worry sir. im at your service.$they all exit separately.$modern text$titania the fairy queen enters with her following of fairies.$titania come dance in a circle and sing a fairy song and then go off for a while to do your work. some of you will kill the worms infesting the rosebuds some of you will fight with bats to get their leathery wings so we can make coats for my small elves. some of you will keep that loud owl away the one that hoots and wonders every night at us dainty fairies. sing me to sleep now and then go off to do your duties and let me rest.$the fairies sing.$first fairy singing snakes with forked tongues and porcupines dont be seen. deadly lizards dont be mean. dont come near our fairy queen.$fairies singing nightingale melodiously sing our sweet lullaby. lulla lulla lullaby lulla lulla lullaby. let no harm or spell or charm come near our lovely lady. say good night with a lullaby.$first fairy singing spiders with your webs stay away. you longlegged things begone$modern text$black beetles dont come near. worms and snails dont be bad.$fairies singing nightingale melodiously sing our sweet lullaby. lulla lulla lullaby lulla lulla lullaby. let no harm or spell or charm come near our lovely lady. say good night with a lullaby.$titania falls asleep.$second fairy okay lets go everythings fine now. one of us will stay and stand guard.$the fairies exit.$oberon enters.$oberon he squeezes flower juice on titania s eyelids whatever you see first when you wake up think of it as your true love. love him and yearn for him even if hes a lynx a cat a bear a leopard or a wild boar. whatevers there when you wake up will be dear to you. wake up when something nasty is nearby.$oberon exits.$lysander and hermia enter.$lysander my love you look like youre about to faint from wandering in the woods for so long and to tell you the truth ive gotten us lost.$modern text$well take a rest if you think its a good idea and wait until daylight when things will be easier.$hermia lets do that lysander. find something to cushion you while you sleep. im going to rest my head on this little slope.$lysander we can both sleep together on the grass. well have one heart one bed two bodies and one faithful vow.$hermia no lysander. please for my sake sleep a little farther away. dont sleep so close to me.$lysander oh sweetheart i didnt mean anything naughty when i said that. when lovers talk to each other their hearts should understand each other. i just meant that our hearts are joined so we can almost think of them as one heart. our two bodies are linked together by the promises weve made to each other so there are two bodies and one faithful vow. so let me sleep next to you. if i lie next to you i wont lie to youill be faithful and respect you.$hermia lysanders got a way with words. i would certainly be rude and shameful if i had implied that you were a liar. but please darling sleep a little farther away so we can behave properly. its only proper for a wellbehaved bachelor and a wellbehaved girl to be physically separated like this. stay away for now and good night my sweet friend. i hope your love for me remains this strong for your entire life$lysander amen to that. i hope my life ends before my loyalty to you does. ill sleep over here. sleep well$modern text$hermia you sleep well too.$hermia and lysander sleep. robin enters.$$robin ive been through the entire forest but i havent found any athenian man to use the flower on. he sees lysander and hermia wait a second whos this hes wearing athenian clothes. this must be the guy who rejected the athenian girl. and heres the girl sleeping soundly on the damp and dirty ground. pretty girl she shouldnt lie near this rude and heartless man. he puts flower juice on lysander s eyelids jerk i throw all the power of this magic charm on your eyes. when you wake up let love keep you from going back to sleep. wake up when im gone because now i have to go to oberon.$robin exits.$demetrius and helena enter running.$helena stop demetrius stop even if only to kill me.$demetrius im telling you get out of here and dont follow me around like this.$helena oh will you leave me alone in the dark dont.$modern text$demetrius stay here at your own risk. im going on alone.$demetrius exits.$helena oh im out of breath from this foolish chase. the more i pray the less i get out of it. hermia is lucky wherever she is because she has beautiful eyes. how did her eyes get so bright not from crying. if thats the case tears wash my eyes more than hers. no no im as ugly as a bear since animals that see me run away in terror. so its no surprise that demetrius runs away from me as if i were a monster. what evil and deceitful mirror made me think i could rival hermias starry eyes she sees lysander but whos this here lysander on the ground is he dead or sleeping i dont see any blood or injurieslysander if youre alive wake up.$lysander waking up id even run through fire if you told me to. radiant beautiful helena i feel like mother nature has allowed me to see into your heart as if by magic. where is demetrius oh id kill that name with my sword if i could$helena dont say that lysander. dont say that. why do you care that he loves hermia what does it matter hermia still loves you so be happy.$lysander happy with hermia no. i regret all the boring time i wasted with her. i dont love hermia i love helena. who wouldnt love a dove more than a crow a mans desires are influenced by his logical mind and its simply logical that youre more worthy of love than hermia is.$modern text$fruits and vegetables dont ripen until the right season of the year. likewise im young and my sense of reason has just ripened. i can finally see the light. my logic has more control over my desires than it used to and its telling me to look into your eyes where i see every love story ever told.$helena why does everyone always make fun of me what have i done to deserve this kind of treatment from you is it not enough is it not enough young man that ill never be pretty enough to get a kind look from demetrius do you have to harp on my inadequacy my god its wrong for you to woo me in such a cruel disdainful way. but goodbye. i have to tell you i thought you were a much kinder person than this. oh how awful that a lady whos been rejected by one man should therefore be treated horribly by another one$helena exits.$lysander she doesnt see hermiahermia keep sleeping and dont come near me ever again eating too many sweets makes people sick to their stomachs and people always hate the mistakes they made in the past worse than anyone else hates those mistakes. hermia youre the sweet ive had too much of and the mistake i used to make so i hate you more than anyone else does.ill use all my talents and efforts to serve helen and bring her honor.$lysander exits.$modern text$hermia waking up help me lysander help me get this snake off of my chest. oh my god what a terrible dream i just had lysander look how im shaking from fear. i thought a snake was eating my heart while you sat smiling and watching. lysanderwhat is he gonelysander my lordwhat is he out of earshot gone no answer nothing oh god where are you say something if you can hear me. say something please im almost fainting with fear. nothing then i guess youre nowhere nearby. ill find youor dieright away.$hermia exits.$modern text$while titania is asleep onstage the clownsbottom quince flute snug snout and starvelingenter.$bottom are we all here$quince right on time. this is the perfect place to rehearse. this clearing will be the stage and this hawthorn bush will be our dressing room. lets put on our play exactly as well perform it for the duke.$bottom peter quince$quince what is it jolly bottom$bottom there are things in this comedy of pyramus and thisbe that will never work. first of all pyramus has to take out a sword to kill himself which the ladies in the audience wont be able to stand. what should we do about that$snout by god thats a real problem its true.$starveling i think well have to leave out all the killing come to think of it.$bottom not at all ive got a plan that will fix everything. write me a prologue that i can recite to the audience before the play starts. ill tell them that we wont hurt anyone with our swords and that pyramus isnt really dead. and to make it even clearer we can tell them that im playing pyramus but im not really pyramusreally im bottom the weaver. thatll keep them from being afraid.$modern text$quince all right well have a prologue then. well write it in alternating eight and sixsyllable lines just like in a ballad.$bottom no add a couple more syllables. make it eight and eight.$snout wont the ladies be scared of the lion$starveling im really worried about that.$bottom sirs you ought to think to yourself bringing ingod forbida lion amongst ladies is really terrible. theres no scarier wild bird than the living lion and we should remember that.$snout so we need another prologue to tell everyone hes not a real lion.$bottom no we can just announce the actors name and let his face show through the lion costume and have him say something himself. he should say the following or something else to the same defect bottom means to say something to the same effect. defect ladies or lovely ladies i would like to ask you or i would like to request of you or i would like to beg you not to be afraid and not to tremble with fear. i value your lives as highly as my own. if you thought i was a real lion i would be risking my life. but no i am not at all a lion. i am a man just like other men. and then he should say his name and tell them plainly that hes snug the carpenter.$quince all right thats what well do then. but there are two things we still have to figure out. how are we going to bring moonlight into a room because you know pyramus and thisbe meet by moonlight.$modern text$snout will the moon be shining on the night were performing our play$bottom we need a calendar look in the almanac. look up moonshine look up moonshine$quince he takes out a book yes the moon will shine that night.$bottom well then you can leave one of the windows open in the big hall where well be performing and the moon can shine in through the window.$quince yes or else someone will have to come in carrying a bundle of sticks and a lantern and say hes come to disfigure bottom means figure symbolize not disfigure. disfigure or represent the character of moonshine because the man in the moon is supposed to carry sticks and a lantern. but theres still another problem we need to have a wall in the big hall because according to the story pyramus and thisbe talked through a little hole in a wall.$snout youll never be able to bring in a wall. what do you think bottom$bottom someone should play the part of wall. he can have some plaster or clay or limestone or something on him to show the audience hes a wall. he can hold his fingers in a vshape like this and pyramus and thisbe can whisper to each other through that little crack.$quince if we can do that everything will be all right. now sit down everybody and rehearse your partspyramus you start. when you have said your lines go hide in that bush.everyone else go there too when youre not onstage.$modern text$robin enters unseen by the characters onstage.$robin to himself who are these country bumpkins swaggering around so close to where the fairy queen is sleeping what are they about to put on a play ill watch. and ill act in it too if i feel like it.$quince speak pyramus.thisbe come forward.$bottom as pyramus thisbe flowers with sweet odious smells$quince odors odors.$bottom as pyramus odors and smells are like your breath my dearest thisbe dear. but whats that a voice wait here a while. ill be right back$bottom exits.$robin to himself thats the strangest pyramus ive ever seen.$robin exits.$flute am i supposed to talk now$quince yes you are. youre supposed to show that you understand that pyramus just went to check on a noise he heard and is coming right back.$flute as thisbe most radiant pyramus you are as white as a lily and the color of a red rose on a splendid rosebush a very lively young man and also a lovely jew. you are as reliable as a horse that never gets tired. ill meet you pyramus at ninnys grave.$modern text$quince thats ninuss grave man. and dont say all of that yet. youre supposed to say some of it as a reply to pyramus. you just said all your lines at once cues and all.pyramus enter. you missed your cue. its never get tired.$flute oh as thisbe as reliable as a horse that never gets tired.$robin enters with bottom with a donkeys head instead of a human head.$bottom as pyramus if i were handsome my lovely thisbe i would still want only you.$quince help its a monster were being haunted. run everyone run$quince flute snug snout and starveling exit.$robin ill follow you. ill run you around in circles through bogs and bushes and woods and thorns. sometimes ill take the shape of a horse sometimes ill take the shape of a hound or a pig or a headless bear. sometimes ill turn into fire and ill neigh like a horse and bark like a hound and grunt like a pig and roar like a bear and burn like a fire at every turn.$robin exits.$bottom why are they running away this is some joke of theirs to scare me.$snout enters.$modern text$snout oh bottom youve changed what have you got on your head$bottom what do you think ive got on my head youre acting like an ass dont you think$snout exits.$quince enters.$quince god bless you bottom god bless you. youve been changed. reborn.$quince exits.$bottom i see what theyre up to. they want to make an ass of me to scare me if they can. but i wont leave this spot no matter what they do. ill walk up and down and sing a song so theyll know im not afraid. singing the blackbird with its black feathers and its orangeandtan beak the thrush with its clear voice the wren with its small piping chirp$titania waking up what angel is this whos waking me up from my bed of flowers$bottom singing the finch the sparrow and the lark the gray cuckoo with his simple song that many men hear but they dont dare say no to it$modern text$of course they dont say no whod waste his time talking to such a stupid bird whod bother to accuse a bird of lying cuckoos symbolize cuckolds men whose wives cheat on them. the cuckoos song was sometimes imagined as a mocking accusation that the men who hear it are cuckolds. a bird of lying even if the bird were telling him that his wife was cheating on him$titania please sing again sweet human. i love to listen to your voice and i love to look at your body. i know this is the first time ive ever seen you but youre so wonderful that i cant help swearing to you that i love you.$bottom i dont think youve got much of a reason to love me. but to tell you the truth reason and love have very little to do with each other these days. its too bad some mutual friend of theirs doesnt introduce them. ha ha no im just kidding.$titania youre as wise as you are beautiful.$bottom no thats not true. but if i were smart enough to get out of this forest id be wise enough to satisfy myself.$titania dont bother wishing you could leave this forest because youre going to stay here whether you want to or not. im no ordinary fairy. i rule over the summer and i love you. so come with me. ill give you fairies as servants and theyll bring you jewels from the depths of the ocean and sing to you while you sleep on a bed of flowers. and ill turn you into a spirit like us so you wont die as humans do.come here peaseblossom cobweb moth and mustardseed$modern text$four fairiespeaseblossom cobweb moth and mustardseedenter.$peaseblossom ready.$cobweb me too.$moth me too.$mustardseed and me too.$all where should we go$titania be kind and polite to this gentleman. follow him around. leap and dance for him. feed him apricots and blackberries with purple grapes green figs and mulberries. steal honey from the bumblebees and make candles out of the bees' wax. light them with the light of glowworms so my love will have light when he goes to bed and wakes up. pluck off colorful butterfly wings and use them to fan moonbeams away from his eyes as he sleeps. bow to him fairies and curtsy to him.$peaseblossom hello mortal$cobweb hello$moth hello$mustardseed hello$bottom i beg your pardon sirs.please tell me your name sir$modern text$cobweb cobweb.$bottom id like to get to know you better mr. cobweb. if i cut my finger ill use you as a bandage to stop the bleeding.and your name sir$peaseblossom peaseblossom.$bottom please give my regards to your mother mrs. peapod and your father mr. peapod. good mr. peaseblossom id like to get to know you better too.and you may i ask what your name is sir$mustardseed mustardseed.$bottom good mr. mustardseed i know you very well. those cowardly gigantic sides of beef have been responsible for many of your family members getting eaten as a condiment on beef. i swear to you many members of your mustard family have made my eyes water before. i look forward to getting to know you better mr. mustardseed.$titania take good care of him. take him to my sleeping area. the moon looks sad to me. when she cries all the little flowers cry too. theyre sad because someone is prevented from having sexor is having it against her will. keep my lover quiet. bring him to me in silence.$they all exit.$modern text$oberon the fairy king enters.$oberon i wonder if titania is awake yet and if she is i wonder what the first thing she saw was. whatever it is she must be completely in love with it now.$robin enters.$ah here comes my messenger.whats going on you crazy spirit what havoc have you wreaked in this part of the forest$robin my mistress titania is in love with a monster. while she was sleeping in her bed of flowers a group of bumbling idiots rough workmen from athens got together nearby to rehearse some play they plan to perform on theseuss wedding day. the stupidest one who played pyramus in their play finished his scene and went to sit in the bushes to wait for his next cue. i took that opportunity to stick a donkeys head on him. when it was time for him to go back onstage and talk to his thisbe he came out of the bushes and everyone saw him. his friends ran away as fast as ducks scatter when they hear a hunters gunshot. one of them was so frightened when he heard my footsteps that he yelled murder and called for help from athens. they were all so afraid that they completely lost their common sense. they started to become scared of inanimate objects terrified by the thorns and briars that catch at their clothing and pull off their sleeves and hats. i led them on in this frightened distracted state and left sweet$modern text$pyramus there transformed into someone with a donkeys head. at that exact moment titania woke up and immediately fell in love with him an ass.$oberon this is going even better than i planned. but have you put the love juice from the flower on the eyes of that athenian as i asked you to do$robin yes i found him when he was asleepso thats taken care of tooand the athenian woman was sleeping near him. when he woke up he must have seen her.$demetrius and hermia enter.$oberon speaking so that only robin can hear step aside. heres the athenian coming now.$robin speaking so that only oberon can hear thats definitely the woman i saw but its not the same man.$demetrius why are you so rude to someone who loves you so much save that kind of harsh language for your worst enemy.$hermia im only scolding you now but i should treat you much worse because im afraid youve given me good reason to curse you. if you killed lysander while he was sleeping then youre already up to your ankles in blood. you might as well jump right into a bloodbath and kill me too.$modern text$he was more faithful to me than the sun is to the daytime. would he have snuck away from me while i was asleep ill believe that when i believe that theres a hole through the center of the earth and the moon has passed all the way through to the other side. the only possibility is that youve murdered him. a murderer should look like you do so pale and grim.$demetrius thats how someone whos been murdered should look and thats how i look. youve pierced me through the heart with your cruelty and yet you the murderer look as bright and clear as a star in the sky.$hermia what does that have to do with my lysander where is he oh good demetrius will you find him for me$demetrius i would rather feed his corpse to my dogs.$hermia get out dog youve driven me to my wits end. did you kill him then from now on i wont even consider you a human being. oh just tell the truth for once. tell the truth if only for my sake.would you have even dared to look at him when he was awake and did you kill him while he was sleeping oh how brave of you a snake could do that as easily as you could. a snake did do it because no snake ever had a more forked lying tongue than you have.$demetrius youre getting all worked up over a misunderstanding. i didnt kill lysander. as far as i know hes not even dead.$hermia then please tell me hes all right.$demetrius if i told you that what would i get out of it$modern text$hermia the privilege of never seeing me again. and now im going to leave your despised company. youll never see me again whether or not hes dead.$hermia exits.$demetrius i cant go after her when shes in a rage like this. so ill stay here for a while. sadness gets worse when you havent had enough sleep. ill try to sleep a little here.  demetrius lies down and falls asleep$oberon to robin what have you done youve made a mistake and put the lovejuice on someone else someone who was truly in love. because of your mistake someones true love must have turned bad instead of this mans false love being turned into a true love.$robin in that case it must be fate. thats the way of the world. for every man whos faithful to his true love a million end up running after a different lover.$oberon go around the forest moving faster than the wind and make sure you find helena of athens.shes lovesick and her face is pale from all the sighing shes been doing because sighing is bad for the blood. bring her here with some trick or illusion and ill put the charm on his eyes for when she comes.$robin i go i go look at me gofaster than an arrow from a tartars the tartars were a people from asia minor famous for their archery tartars bow.$robin exits$modern text$oberon putting flower juice on demetrius s eyelids you purple flower hit by cupids arrow sink into the pupils of this mans eyes. when he sees the girl he should love make her seem as bright to him as the evening star. young man when you wake up if shes nearby beg her to cure your lovesickness.$robin enters.$robin helena is nearby boss. the young man who i mistook for this one is there too begging her to love him. should we watch this ridiculous scene lord what fools these mortals are$oberon step aside. the noise theyre making will wake up demetrius.$robin then the two of them will both pursue one girl. that will be funny enough and preposterous situations are my favorite thing.$lysander and helena enter.$lysander why do you think im making fun of you when i tell you i love you people dont cry when theyre mocking someone.$modern text$look when i swear that i love you i cry and when someone cries while hes making a promise hes usually telling the truth. how can it seem like im making fun of you when my tears prove that im sincere$helena you get trickier and trickier. youve made the same promises to me and to hermiathey cant both be true they must both be false. the promises youre making to me belong to hermia. will you abandon her if you weighed the promises you made to me against the promises you made to her theyd come out the samethey both weigh nothing. theyre lies.$lysander i wasnt thinking clearly when i made those promises to her.$helena and i dont believe youre thinking clearly now as you break those promises.$lysander demetrius loves her and he doesnt love you.$demetrius waking up oh helena you goddess you divine and perfect nymph what can i compare your eyes to crystal isnt as clear as they are. oh your lips are as ripe as a pair of tempting cherries touching each other the pure white of the snow on a mountaintop seems black as a crows wing next to the whiteness of your hands. oh let me kiss your beautiful white hand. itll make me so happy$helena damn it i see youre all determined to gang up on me for a few laughs. if you had any manners at all you wouldnt treat me like this. cant you just hate me as i know you do do you have to get together to humiliate me too if you were real men as you pretend to be you wouldnt treat a lady this way making vows and promises and praising my beauty when i know youre really both disgusted by me. youre competing for$modern text$hermias love and now youre competing to see which one of you can make fun of me the most. thats a great idea a really manly thing to domaking a poor girl cry no respectable person would offend an innocent girl just to have some fun.$lysander dont be cruel demetrius. i know you love hermia and you know i know it. right here right now i swear im giving up all my claims on her and handing her to you. in exchange give up your claim to love helena since i love her and will love her until i die.$helena nobodys ever gone to so much trouble just to make fun of someone.$demetrius lysander keep your hermia. i dont want her. if i ever loved her all that love is gone now. my love for her was temporary. now ill love helena forever.$lysander helena its not true.$demetrius dont insult a deep love that you dont understand or youll pay the price. look here comes the woman you love.$hermia enters.$hermia its hard to see clearly in the dark of night but its easier to hear well.$modern text$i couldnt see you lysander but i heard your voice and thats how i found you. why did you leave me alone so unkindly$lysander why stay when love tells you to go$hermia but what love could make my lysander leave me$lysander i had to hurry to my love beautiful helena who lights up the night better than all those fiery stars. why are you looking for me didnt you figure out that i left you because i hate you$hermia you cant mean what youre saying. its impossible.$helena so shes in on this too now i see that all three of them have gotten together to play this cruel trick on me. hurtful hermia you ungrateful girl have you conspired with these two to provoke me with this horrible teasing have you forgotten all the talks weve had together the vows we made to be like sisters to one another all the hours we spent together wishing that we never had to say goodbyehave you forgotten our friendship in our schooldays our childhood innocence we used to sit together and sew one flower with our two needles sewing it on one piece of cloth sitting on the same cushion singing one song in the same key as if our hands our sides our voices and our minds were stuck together. we grew together like twin cherrieswhich seemed to be separate but were also togethertwo lovely cherries on one stem.$modern text$we seemed to have two separate bodies but we had one heart. do you want to destroy our old friendship by joining these men to insult your poor friend its not friendly and its not ladylike. all women would be angry with you for doing it even though im the only one whos hurt by it.$hermia im completely dumbfounded by what youre saying. im not insulting you. it sounds more like youre insulting me.$helena come on confess. didnt you send lysander as an insult to follow me around praising my eyes and my face havent you made your other love demetriuswho kicked me with his foot not long agocall me a goddess and a divine rare precious heavenly creature why does he talk like that to a girl he cant stand and why does lysander deny that he loves you when he loves you so deeply why would he show me any affection unless you told him to why does it matter that im not as lucky or lovable as you are and that the love i feel is unrequited you should pity me for that reason not hate me.$hermia i dont know what youre talking about.$helena oh fine. all right go ahead keep up your little game pretend to be sympathetic but then nudge each other and wink and make faces at me when i turn my back. keep up your wonderful game. youre doing such a good job on this trick someone should write a book about it.$modern text$if you had any sense of pity or manners you wouldnt pretend to fight over me like this. but goodbye. its partly my own fault since i followed you here. leavingor dyingwill soon take care of everything.$lysander stay lovely helena. listen to my excuse. my love my life my soul beautiful helena$helena thats a good one.$hermia to lysander dont insult her like that lysander darling.$demetrius to lysander if hermias begging cant make you stop insulting helena i can force you to do so.$lysander you cant force me any more than hermia can beg me. your threats are no stronger than her whining.helena i love you. i swear i do. ill give my life for you just to prove this guy wrong when he says i dont love you.$demetrius i say that i love you more than he does.$lysander if thats what you say go fight a duel with me and prove it.$demetrius youre on. lets do it.$hermia lysander where are you going with all this$she holds lysander back$lysander to hermia get away you african$demetrius to hermia no no. hell act like hes going to break free from you hermia.$modern text$to lysander pretend like youre going to follow me but then dont come. youre a coward get out of here$lysander to hermia stop hanging on me you cat you thorn. let go of me or ill shake you off like a snake.$hermia why have you gotten so rude whats happened to you my darling$lysander your darling get out you darkskinned gypsy get out you horrible poison. get out$hermia are you joking$helena of course he is and so are you.$lysander demetrius im ready to fight you as promised.$demetrius i wish we had a signed legal contract. i can see you dont keep your promises very well. i dont trust you.$lysander what do you want me to hit hermia hurt her kill her sure i hate her but i wouldnt hurt her.$hermia to lysander can you hurt me any more than by saying you hate me hate me why whats happened to you my love am i not hermia arent you lysander im as beautiful now as i was a little while ago. you still loved me when we fell asleep but when you woke up you left me. so you left meoh god help mefor real$lysander i certainly did and i never wanted to see you again. so stop hoping and wondering what i mean.$modern text$ive spelled it out for you clearly. its no joke. i hate you and love helena.$hermia oh no to helena you trickster you snake you thief what did you sneak in at night and steal my loves heart from him$helena oh thats very nice you ought to be ashamed of yourself youre going to make me mad enough to answer you damn you you faker you puppet$hermia puppet why puppetoh i see where this is going. shes talking about our difference in height. shes paraded in front of him to show off how tall she is. she won him over with her height.does he have such a high opinion of you because im so short is that it so how short am i you painted barber pole tell me. how short am i im not too short to gouge your eyes out with my fingernails.$helena to lysander and demetrius please dont let her hurt me gentlemen however much you want to tease me. i never was much good with insults. im not mean and catty like her. im a nice shy girl. please dont let her hit me. maybe you think that because shes shorter than me i can take her.$modern text$hermia shorter see shes doing it again$helena good hermia please dont act so bitter toward me. i always loved you hermia and gave you advice. i never did anything to hurt youexcept once when i told demetrius that you planned to sneak off into this forest. and i only did that because i loved demetrius so much. he followed you. and i followed him because i loved him. but he told me to get lost and threatened to hit me kick meeven kill me. now just let me go quietly back to athens. ill carry my mistakes back with me. i wont follow you anymore. please let me go. you see how naive and foolish ive been.$hermia well get out of here then whats keeping you$helena my stupid heart which im leaving behind here.$hermia what youre leaving it with lysander$helena no with demetrius.$lysander dont be afraid. she cant hurt you helena.$demetrius to lysander thats right hermia wont hurt helena even if you try to help her.$helena oh when you get her angry shes a good fighter and vicious too. she was a hellcat in school. and shes fierce even though shes little.$hermia little again nothing but little and short why are you letting her insult me like this let me at her.$modern text$lysander to hermia get lost you dwarf you tiny little weed you scrap you acorn$demetrius youre doing too much to defend a woman who wants nothing to do with you. leave hermia alone. dont talk about helena. dont take helenas side. if you continue treating hermia so badly youll pay for it.$lysander hermias not holding onto me anymore. follow me if youre brave enough and well fight over helena.$demetrius follow no ill walk right next to you side by side.$demetrius and lysander exit.$hermia all this fighting is because of you. stay where you are.$helena im not sticking around here any more. i dont trust you. you might be a better fighter than i am but my legs are longer and i can run away faster.$helena exits.$hermia i just cant believe any of this. i dont know what to say.$hermia exits.$oberon to robin this is all your fault. you make mistakes constantly or else you cause this kind of trouble on purpose.$modern text$robin believe me king of illusions i made a mistake. didnt you tell me that id be able to recognize the man by the athenian clothes he was wearing so far ive done exactly what i was supposed to doi put the love potion on an athenians eyes. and so far im pleased with the way things have turned out since i find all of this commotion very entertaining.$oberon as you can see these lovers are looking for a place to fight. hurry up robin and make the night dark and cloudy. cover the sky with a lowhanging fog as dark as hell and get these overeager rivals so completely lost in the woods that they cant run into each other. imitate lysanders voice and egg demetrius on with insults. then rant for a while in demetriuss voice and egg lysander on. that way youll get them away from each other until theyre so exhausted that theyll sleep like the dead.  oberon gives a new flower to robin when theyre asleep crush some of this flowers juice into lysanders eyes. the flowers juice has the power to erase all the damage thats been done to his eyes and to make him see normally the way he used to. when they wake up all this trouble and conflict will seem like a dream or a meaningless vision. then the lovers will go back to athens united together until death. while youre busy with that ill go see queen titania and ask her once again for the indian boy. and then ill undo the spell that i cast over her so she wont be in love with that monster anymore. then everything will be peaceful again.$modern text$robin weve got to act fast my lord of the fairies. nights fading quickly and in the distance the morning star is shining warning us that dawn is coming. at dawn the ghosts that have been wandering around all night go home to the graveyards. the souls of people who werent buried in holy ground but instead lie rotting by the side of the road or at the bottom of a river have already gone back to their wormy graves. they werent buried in a real graveyard because they committed suicide and they dont want their shame to be seen in daylight so they avoid sunlight and stay forever in the darkness of night.$oberon but were not like that. were a different kind of spirit and we dont have to run away from the sunlight. i like the morning. i often wander around in the woods like a forest ranger until the sun rises in the fiery red sky over the ocean turning the salty green water to gold. but you should hurry anyway. dont delay. we still have time to get all of this done before daybreak.$oberon exits.$robin up and down up and down i will lead them up and down. the people fear me in the country and the town. goblin lead them up and down. here comes one of them now.$lysander enters.$lysander where are you demetrius you arrogant bastard say something.$modern text$robin in demetriuss voice im over here you villain with my sword out and ready to fight. where are you$lysander im coming.$robin in demetriuss voice lets go to a flatter area where we can fight more easily.$lysander exits.$demetrius enters.$demetrius lysander say something you coward did you run away from me say something are you behind some bush where are you hiding$robin in lysanders voice you coward are you bragging to the stars and telling the bushes that you want a fight but then you wont come and fight me come here you coward come here you child ill beat you with a stick. it would be shameful to fight you with a sword the way i would fight with a real man.$demetrius are you there$robin in lysanders voice follow my voice. this isnt a good place to fight.$they exit.$lysander enters.$lysander hes walking ahead of me and he keeps daring me to follow him. when i reach the place hes calling from he disappears. this villain is much quicker than i am. i ran after him fast but he ran away from me faster so that now here i am in some dark part of the forest where the ground is uneven.$modern text$ill rest here. he lies down i hope the pleasant daytime comes soon as soon as the gray light of early morning appears ill find demetrius and get my revenge for this insult.$lysander lies down and falls asleep. robin and demetrius enter.$robin in lysanders voice ha ha ha hey you coward why arent you coming$demetrius wait for me if youre not too scared i know thats why youre running away from me constantly changing placesyoure afraid to stand still and wait for me. youre scared to look me in the eye. where are you now$robin in lysanders voice come here. im over here.$demetrius no youre just taunting me. youll pay for this if i ever see you facetoface in the daylight. go wherever you want. im exhausted i need to lie down and sleep on this cold ground. but watch out. ill find you at dawn. demetrius lies down and sleeps$helena enters.$helena oh what a long tedious exhausting night i wish it would end. i wish the comforting light of day would shine so i can go back to athens and get away from these people who hate me so much. i hope ill be able to sleep and escape my troubles for a while. people can sometimes forget their difficulties when theyre asleep. helena lies down and sleeps$modern text$robin only three so far were still waiting for one more. two of both kinds makes four. ah here she comes angry and sad. cupid is a bad boy for making poor women go crazy like this.$hermia enters.$hermia ive never been more exhausted or upset. im all wet from the dew and scratched up by thorns and i cant crawl any farther. i just cant go on. my legs cant hold themselves up. ill sleep here until morning. if they do fight i hope lysander is safe hermia lies down and sleeps$robin sleep well there on the ground. ill cure you gentle lover by putting this medicine on your eyes. robin puts the nectar of the flower on lysanders eyelids when you wake you will be truly delighted to see the woman you once loved. and when you wake up youll be a walking illustration of the wellknown country proverb. jack will have jill and everything will be all right.$robin exits.$modern text$demetrius helena hermia and lysander are still sleeping on the stage. titania enters with bottom who still has a donkeys head and the fairies peaseblossom cobweb moth and mustardseed. oberon enters behind them unseen by those onstage.$titania to bottom come over here and sit down on this flowery bed while i caress those lovable cheeks. ill put roses on your silky smooth head and kiss your big beautiful ears my gentle darling.$bottom wheres peaseblossom$peaseblossom here.$bottom scratch my head peaseblossom. wheres monsieur cobweb$cobweb here.$bottom monsieur cobweb sir get out your weapons and kill me a striped bumblebee on a thistle and bring me its honey. dont tire yourself out monsieur. oh and monsieur be careful not to break the honeysac. id hate to see you drowned in honey sir.$cobweb exits.$wheres monsieur mustardseed$mustardseed here.$modern text$bottom give me your first mr. mustardseed. please stop bowing good sir.$mustardseed what would you like me to do$bottom nothing good sir except to help sir cobweb scratch my head. i should go to the barbers monsieur because i think im getting really hairy around the face. and im such a sensitive ass that if my hair even tickles me a little i need to scratch.$titania would you like to hear some music my sweet love$bottom i have a pretty good ear for music. lets hear someone play the triangle and the sticks.$titania or tell me my sweet love what youd like to eat.$bottom actually id like a few pounds of grass. id like to munch on some good dry oats. or maybe ive got a hankering for a bundle of hay. theres nothing like good hay really sweet hay.$titania i have an adventurous fairy wholl go seek out the squirrels secret stash and get you some fresh nuts.$bottom id rather have a handful or two of dried peas. but please dont let any of your people wake me up. i really want to sleep now.$titania go to sleep and i will wrap my arms around you. fairies go away. run off in all directions.$the fairies exit.$modern text$im putting my arms around you just like the woodbine tendril gently twists itself around the sweet honeysuckle and like the female ivy curls itself around the branches of the elm tree. oh how i love you im so crazy about you$bottom and titania sleep. robin enters.$$oberon welcome good robin. do you see this sweet sight now im starting to pity titania for being so infatuated. i ran into her recently at the edge of the forest looking for sweet presents for this hateful idiot and i scolded her and argued with her. she had put a wreath of fresh fragrant flowers around his hairy forehead and the drops of dew that lay in the center of the flowers made the flowers look like they were crying with shame to be decorating the head of that ugly jackass. when i had taunted her as much as i wanted to and she begged me very nicely to leave her alone i asked her for the stolen indian child. she said yes right away and sent a fairy to bring him to my home in fairyland. and now that i have the boy ill undo the spell that makes her vision so disgustingly wrong. and gentle puck take this transformed asss head off of the head of that athenian man so that when he wakes up at the same time as the rest of them do they can all go back to athens. theyll only remember the events of tonight as a very unpleasant dream. but first ill release the fairy queen from the spell.$oberon squeezes the juice from the second flower into titanias eyes$modern text$be like you used to be and see like you used to see. this bud belongs to diana the goddess of virginity and it has the power to undo the effects of cupids flower. now titania wake up my sweet queen.$titania waking up oberon ive had such a strange dream i dreamed i was in love with an ass.$oberon theres your boyfriend sleeping right over there.$titania how did this happen oh i hate looking at his face now$oberon be quiet for a while.robin take off his donkey head.titania get the fairies to play some music and make these five people sleep more soundly than humans have ever slept before.$titania music play the kind of music that puts people to sleep.$the music plays.$robin removing the asss head from bottom when you wake up see things with your own foolish eyes again.$oberon play the music.take my hands my queen and well lull these people to sleep with our soft dancing. he dances with titania now that you and i are friends again we can dance for duke theseus tomorrow at midnight and bless his marriage and his marriage bed. these other lovers will get married alongside him and theyll all be in high spirits.$modern text$robin listen fairy king. i can hear the lark singing. mornings here.$oberon in that case my queen lets travel silently and solemnly across the globe to where its still night circling the earth faster than the moon does.$titania while were walking you can tell me how i ended up sleeping on the ground with these humans last night.$oberon titania and robin exit.$a hunting horn blows. theseus enters with his servants egeus and hippolyta.$theseus one of you go find the forest ranger. since were done with the may day rites and its still so early in the morning my love will have a chance to hear the beautiful music of my hunting dogs barking as they chase their prey. unleash the dogs in the western valley. let them go. now go find the forest ranger.$a servant exits.$my beautiful queen well go up the mountain and listen to the hounds as their barking echoes in the cliffs and sounds like music.$hippolyta i was with the heroes hercules and cadmus once when their spartan hunting dogs cornered a bear. id never heard such impressive barking before.$modern text$the forests the skies the mountains everything around us seemed to echo the barks of the hounds. id never heard such raucous music such pleasant thunder.$theseus my dogs are bred from spartan hounds. they have the same folds of flesh around their mouths the same sandycolored fur and hanging ears that brush the morning dew off the grass. they have crooked knees and folds of skin under their necks just like the spartan hounds. theyre not very fast in the chase but their barking sounds like bells ringing. each bark is perfectly in tune with the others like notes on a scale. no one anywhere has ever gone hunting with a more musical pack of dogs. judge for yourself when you hear them. he sees the four lovers sleeping but wait a minute who are these women$egeus my lord thats my daughter asleep on the ground over there and this is lysander here and this is demetrius and this is helena old nedars daughter. i dont understand why theyre all here together.$theseus they probably woke up early to celebrate may day and came here for my celebration when they heard id be here. but tell me egeus. isnt today the day when hermia has to tell us her decision about whether shell marry demetrius$egeus it is my lord.$theseus go tell the hunters to blow their horns and wake them up.$a servant exits.$someone shouts offstage. horns are blown. lysander demetrius helena and hermia wake up.$good morning my friends. valentines day is over.$modern text$are you lovebirds only starting to pair up now$lysander demetrius helena and hermia all kneel.$lysander forgive us my lord.$theseus please all of you stand up.$lysander demetrius helena and hermia get up.$to lysander and demetrius i know you two are enemies. has the world really become so gentle and peaceful that people who hate each other have started to trust each other and sleep beside each other without being afraid$lysander my lord what i say may be a little confused since im half asleep and half awake. i swear at the moment i really couldnt tell you how i ended up here. but i thinki want to tell you the truth and now that i think about it i think this is truei came here with hermia. we were planning to leave athens to escape the athenian law and$egeus to theseus enough enough my lord. youve heard enough evidence i insist that the law punish himthey were going to run away demetrius they were running away to defeat us robbing you of your wife and me of my fatherly right to decide who my soninlaw will be.$demetrius to theseus my lord the beautiful helena told me about their secret plan to escape into this forest. i was furious and followed them here and the lovely helena was so in love with me that she followed me.$modern text$im not sure how it happenedbut somehow something made my love for hermia melt away like snow. my past love for hermia now seems like a memory of some cheap toy i used to love as a child. now the only person i love and believe in and want to look at is helena. i was engaged to her before i ever met hermia. then i hated her for a time as a sick person hates the food he usually loves. but now i have my natural taste back like a sick person when he recovers. now i want helena i love her i long for her and i will always be true to her.$theseus you pretty lovers are lucky you met me here. well talk more about this later.egeus im overriding your wishes. these couples will be married along with me and hippolyta in the temple later today.and now since the morning is almost over well give up on the idea of hunting. come with us to athens. we three couples will celebrate with a sumptuous feast. come hippolyta.$theseus hippolyta and egeus exit with their followers.$demetrius what exactly just happened the events of last night seem small and hard to see clearly like faroff mountains that look like clouds in the distance.$hermia yes its like my eyes are out of focus and im seeing everything double.$helena me too.$modern text$i won demetrius so easily as if he were a precious diamond i just found lying around. its mine because i found it but i feel like someone else could easily come and claim it was hers.$demetrius are you sure were awake it seems to me like were still sleeping still dreaming. do you remember seeing the duke here did he tell us to follow him$hermia yes he did. and my father was here too.$helena and hippolyta.$lysander and he told us to follow him to the temple.$demetrius well then were awake. lets follow him. we can tell one another our dreams along the way.$lysander demetrius helena and hermia exit.$bottom waking up tell me when my cue comes and ill say my line. my next cue is most handsome pyramus. hey peter quince flute the bellowsrepairman snout the handyman starveling my god theyve all run away and left me sleeping here what a weird dream i had.you cant even describe such a weird dream. youd be an ass if you even tried to explain it. i thought i wasno nobody can even describe what i was. i thought i was i thought i hadbut a person would be an idiot to try to say what i thought i had. no eye has ever heard no ear has ever seen no hand has tasted or tongue felt or heart described what my dream was like. ill get peter quince to write this dream down as a ballad.$modern text$ill call it bottoms dream because its so deep that it has no bottom. and ill sing it for the duke in the intermission of a play. or maybe to make it even more lovely ill sing it when the heroine dies.$bottom exits.$modern text$quince flute snout and starveling enter.$quince have you sent anyone to bottoms house has he come home yet$starveling no ones heard from him. im sure hes been kidnapped.$flute if he doesnt show up the play is ruined. it wont go on. will it$quince no it would be impossible. hes the only person in athens who can play pyramus.$flute definitely. hes quite simply the smartest workingman in athens.$quince yes and the best looking too. and his voice is the paramour of sweetness.$flute you mean paragon. a paramour paramour = lover paramour is something bad.$snug enters.$snug the dukes leaving the temple. two or three more lords and ladies have been married too. if wed been able to put on our play we would have had it made.$flute oh that great funny guy bottom he would have gotten a pension of six pence a day for his whole life. six pence a day wouldve been forced on him. ill be damned if the duke wouldnt have given him six pence a day for playing pyramus.$modern text$and he would have deserved it too. pyramus is worth six pence a day a pension of six pence a day would be a lot of money for a working class man. six pence a day or its worth nothing$bottom enters.$bottom where are my guys where are my good fellows$quince bottom oh how wonderful to see you oh what a relief$bottom my friends ive got some amazing things to tell youbut dont ask me to tell you what. i swear by my athenian citizenship that i wont tell you anything. ill tell you everything exactly as it happened.$quince tell us bottom.$bottom no you wont get a word out of me. all ill tell you is that the duke has had dinner already. now its time to get your costumes together. find some good strings for tying on your false beards and grab new ribbons to decorate your shoes. meet me at the palace as soon as possible. look over your lines again. our plays going to be performed for the duke so make sure thisbes wearing clean underwear and make sure whoevers playing the lion doesnt cut his nails because he needs them long to look like lions claws. and no one eat any onions or garlic. if we have sweetsmelling breath im sure theyll say its a sweet play. now no more talking. get busy go$they all exit.$modern text$theseus hippolyta and philostrate enter with a number of lords and servants.$hippolyta these lovers are saying some strange things theseus.$theseus yes strangeand totally made up too. ill never believe any of these old legends or fairy tales. lovers and madmen hallucinate about things that sane people just cant understand. lunatics lovers and poets all are ruled by their overactive imaginations. some people think they see devils and monsters everywhereand theyre lunatics. lovers are just as crazy and think a darkskinned gypsy is the most gorgeous woman in the world. poets are always looking around like theyre having a fit confusing the mundane with the otherworldly and describing things in their writing that simply dont exist. all these people have such strong imaginations that when they feel happy they assume a god or some other supernatural being is bringing that happiness to them. or if theyre afraid of something at night they look at the shrubbery and imagine its a wild bear$hippolyta but the story that these lovers are telling and the fact that they all saw and heard exactly the same things make me think theres more going on here than imaginary fantasies. their story is bizarre and astounding but its solid and consistent.$modern text$richard duke of gloucester enters alone.$richard now all of my familys troubles have come to a glorious end thanks to my brother king edward iv. all the clouds that threatened the york family have vanished and turned to sunshine. now we wear the wreaths of victory on our heads. weve taken off our armor and weapons and hung them up as decorations. instead of hearing trumpets call us to battle we dance at parties. we get to wear easy smiles on our faces rather than the grim expressions of war. instead of charging toward our enemies on armored horses we dance for our ladies in their chambers accompanied by sexy songs on the lute. but im not made to be a seducer or to make faces at myself in the mirror. i was badly made and dont have the looks to strut my stuff in front of pretty sluts. ive been cheated of a nice body and face or even normal proportions. i am deformed spit out from my mothers womb prematurely and so badly formed that dogs bark at me as i limp by them. im left with nothing to do in this weak idle peacetime unless i want to look at my lumpy shadow in the sun and sing about that.$modern text$since i cant amuse myself by being a lover ive decided to become a villain. ive set dangerous plans in motion using lies drunken prophecies and stories about dreams to set my brother clarence and the king against each other. if king edward is as honest and fairminded as i am deceitful and cruel then clarence is going to be locked away in prison today because of a prophecy that g edward interprets g to mean george duke of clarence though ironically it could just as well mean richard duke of gloucester. g will murder edwards children. oh time to hide what im thinkinghere comes clarence.$clarence enters surrounded by guards with brakenbury.$good afternoon brother. why are you surrounded by these armed guards$clarence his majesty is so concerned about my personal safety that he has ordered them to conduct me to the tower the tower of london where political prisoners were kept. tower .$richard youre being arrested why$clarence because my name is george.$richard thats not your fault he should imprison the person who named you instead. maybe the king is sending you to the tower to have you renamed. but really whats going on clarence can you tell me$modern text$clarence ill tell you as soon as i know richard because at this point i have no idea. all ive been able to find out is that our brother the king has been listening to prophecies and dreams. he picked out the letter g from the alphabet and said a wizard told him that g will take the throne away from his children. he thinks g is me. ive learned that this along with other frivolous reasons like it is what prompted the king to send me to prison.$richard well this is what happens when men let themselves be ruled by women. the king isnt the one sending you to the tower clarence. its his wife lady grey who got him to do this. remember how she and her brother anthony woodeville made him send lord hastings to the tower hastings was just released. were not safe clarence were not safe.$clarence by god i think the only people who are safe are the queens own relatives and the latenight messengers the king uses to fetch his mistress mistress shore. did you hear how lord hastings had to beg the queen to be freed$richard hastings got his freedom by bowing down to that goddess. and ill tell you what. if we want to stay in the kings good graces were going have to act like the mistresss richard implies that mistress shore and the queen did not belong to the rank of gentry. mistresss servants too. ever since our brother made them gentlewomen mistress shore and the queen have become mighty busybodies in our kingdom.$modern text$brakenbury i beg your pardon my lords but the king gave me orders that no one however high in rank should speak privately to clarence.$richard all right. if you like brakenbury you can listen to anything we say. were not saying anything treasonous man. we say the king is wise and good and his noble queen is getting old pretty and not jealous. and that mr. shores wife has nice feet cherry lips pretty eyes and a very pleasant way of expressing herself. and finally that the queens relatives have all been elevated in rank. what do you think is there anything inaccurate in that$brakenbury i have nothing to do with what youre talking about my lord.$richard nothing to do with mrs. shore i tell you mister theres only one man who gets to do nothing to do nothing or naught meant to have sex. richard is playing off brakenburys innocent frightened remark. nothing with her and not be punished for it. everyone else had better keep their nothings to themselves.$brakenbury who is that my lord$richard her husband you rascal. are you going to get me in trouble$brakenbury i beg your grace grace is a title of address for nobility and royalty and might apply to a king queen duke duchess or archbishop. grace to pardon me and now please stop talking to clarence.$modern text$clarence we know you have a job to do brakenbury and well do what you say.$richard we are required to serve the queen and we must obey her. farewell brother. i will go to the king and do whatever you want me to even if its to call my brothers wife sister in order to set you free. but just so you know i am very angry about how our own brother has treated you angrier than you can imagine.$clarence it doesnt make either of us happy i know.$richard well your imprisonment wont last long. i will either get you out lying if i have to or stay in prison in your place. in the meantime be patient.$clarence i have no choice. goodbye.$clarence brakenbury and the guards exit.$richard go walk the path that you will never return from. dumb honest clarence. i love you so much that ill send your soul to heaven very soonif heaven will accept anything from me that is. but whos coming the newly released hastings$hastings enters.$hastings good afternoon my dear lord$richard the same to you my lord welcome to the open air again. how did you tolerate prison$modern text$hastings with patience noble lord as prisoners must. but i will live to thank those who sent me there.$richard no doubt no doubt. and so will clarence for your enemies are his enemies and they have gotten the upper hand of him as well as of you.$hastings its a shame that we eagles are caged up while the vultures are free to do whatever they please.$richard whats the news abroad$hastings no news as bad as the news at home the king is sickly weak and depressed and his doctors are very afraid hes going to die$richard now by george that really is terrible news. oh the king has abused his body with bad habits for a long time and its finally taking its toll on him. very sad. where is he in his bed$hastings he is.$richard you go ahead and i will follow you.$hastings exits.$modern text$the king wont live i hope. but hed better not die till clarence is sent packing to heaven. ill go see the king and with carefully argued lies get him to hate clarence even more than he already does. if my plan succeeds clarence doesnt have another day to live. then gods free to send king edward to heaven too and leave me the world to run around in ill marry the earl of warwicks youngest daughter lady anne. so what if i killed her husband and her father the best way to make up for the girls losses is to become what shes lost a husband and a father. so thats what ill do not because i love her but because ill get something out of it. but im running ahead of myself. clarence is still alive edward is not only alive hes king. only when theyre dead can i start to count my gains.$he exits.$modern text$the corpse of king henry vi is carried in on a bier a bier is a framework for carrying or displaying a corpse or coffin. bier  followed by lady anne dressed in mourning clothes and armed guards.$anne set down your honorable load men if there is ever any honor in being dead. i want to mourn the cruel death of this good man. look at the noble kings poor cold bodythe measly remains of the lancaster family.$they put down the bier.$his royal blood has drained right out of him. i hope i can talk to your ghost henry without breaking church laws. i want you to hear my sorrow. my husband annes husband was prince edward king henrys son and a lancaster. husband was murdered by the same man who stabbed you. my tears now fall into the holes where your life leaked out. i curse the man who made these holes. i curse the mans heart who had the heart to stab you. and i curse the mans blood who shed your blood. i want the man who made me suffer by killing you to face a more terrible end than i could wish on spiders toads and all the poisonous venomous things things alive. if he ever has a child let it be born prematurely and let it look like a monsterso ugly and unnatural that the sight of it frightens its own mother.$modern text$and if he ever has a wife let her be more miserable when he dies than i am now. guards lets continue on to chertsey monastery carrying this holy burden you picked up at st. pauls monastery.$they pick up the bier.$when it gets too heavy rest and ill lament over king henrys corpse some more.$richard enters.$richard halt corpse bearers and put down your load.$anne what wicked magician has conjured up this devil to interrupt this sacred burial rite$richard villains set down the corpse or ill make a corpse of you.$gentleman my lord stand back and let the coffin pass.$richard rude dog stop when i command you to and put up your weapon so its not pointing at my chest or ill strike you to the ground and trample on you you beggar for being so bold.$they put down the bier.$modern text$anne to the gentlemen and guards what are you trembling youre all afraid of him well i cant blame you. youre only human after all and mortals cant stand to look at the devil. to richard begone you dreadful servant of hell. you only had power over my fatherinlaws body you cant have his soul. so get out.$richard sweet saint for goodnesss sake dont be so angry.$anne ugly devil for gods sake get out of here and leave us alone. you have made the happy world into your hell filling it with cursing cries and lamentations. if you enjoy looking at your awful deeds take a look at this noteworthy example of your butcheries.$she points to the corpse.$oh gentlemen look look dead henrys wounds have opened up and are bleeding again shame on you you deformed lump. its your presence that draws out this blood from his empty veins. your inhuman and unnatural actions have provoked this unnatural flood of blood. oh god who made this blood revenge his death oh earth which soaks up this blood revenge his death either let heaven send lightning to strike the murderer dead or let the earth open wide and devour him as it does this good kings blood.$modern text$richard dear woman you dont know the rules of charity. when faced with bad youre supposed to turn it into good and when subject to curses youre supposed to convert them into blessings.$anne villain you dont know the laws of god or of man. even the fiercest wild animal has some touch of pity.$richard if i know nothing about pity that must mean im not an animal.$anne its amazing to hear a devil speak the truth$richard its even stranger when an angel is so angry. divine perfect woman give me a chance to prove in detail that im innocent of the evils you accuse me of.$anne contagious infection of humanity give me a chance to condemn you for the evils i know youve committed.$richard you who are beautiful beyond words calm down and let me explain myself.$anne you who are wicked beyond belief the only explanation ill accept from you is for you to hang yourself.$richard such an expression of despair would only prove that i was guilty.$anne maybe but if you killed yourself it would also show that you felt some guilt for killing others.$modern text$richard lets say i didnt kill them.$anne then you might as well say theyre not dead. but they are dead and you killed them you slave of the devil.$richard i did not kill your husband.$anne well then he must be alive.$richard no he is dead. edward killed him.$anne youre lying. queen margaret saw your sword steaming with his blood. it was the same sword you almost killed her withand you would have killed her if my brothers hadnt fought you off.$richard she provoked me with her lying mouth accusing me of crimes i didnt commit.$anne no what provoked you was your own bloody mind which never thinks about anything but butchering. you killed this king didnt you$richard yes ill grant you that.$anne youll grant me you hedgehog then let god grant me that youll be damned for that wicked deed. oh he was gentle mild and virtuous.$richard that will please god who has him now.$anne he is in heaven where you will never go.$richard let him thank me who helped him get there. hes better suited to be there than here.$modern text$anne and youre not suited for any place except hell.$richard yes and one other place if youll only let me name it.$anne some dungeon.$richard your bedroom.$anne there is no rest to be had in any bedroom where you are$richard exactly madam until i sleep with you.$anne i hope anne assumes that shes never going to sleep with him. hope youre right.$richard i know i am. but gentle lady anne lets stop this rapidfire argument and move more slowly. isnt the person who caused the untimely deaths of these two plantagenets plantagenet was the name of the royal family that ruled england from the twelfth to the fifteenth centuries. both the lancasters the family to which lady annes husband and fatherinlaw belonged and the yorks the family to which richard and his brothers belong are descended from the plantagenets. plantagenets  henry and edward as much to blame as the person who actually executed the murders$modern text$anne youre both those peopleresponsible for both cause and effect.$richard your beauty caused what i did. it haunted me in my sleep. i would have killed the whole world just to be able spend one hour next to you.$anne if i believed you murderer i would take my nails and scratch that beauty right off my cheeks.$richard i couldnt stand to see you destroy your beauty you wont touch it as long as im standing next to you. just as everyone becomes cheerful from the sun im cheered up by your looks. they are my daylight my life.$anne then i hope night shadows your day and death takes your life$richard dont damn yourself. you fair lady are both my day and my life.$anne i wish i were so i could deprive you of both day and life.$richard its strange that you want to take revenge on the person who loves you.$anne its just and reasonable that i want to take revenge on the person who killed my husband.$richard the man who killed your husband dear lady only did it to help you get a better husband.$anne there is no better one on earth.$modern text$richard wrong. there is a man who loves you better than your husband could.$anne name him.$richard plantagenet.$anne yes thats my husbands name.$richard someone else has the same name but hes a better man.$anne where is this man$richard here.$anne spits at him.$why do you spit at me$anne if only i could spit poison.$richard poison never came from such a sweet place.$anne poison never landed on such an ugly toad. get out of my sight youre poisoning my eyes.$richard your beautiful eyes sweet lady have infected mine with love.$anne i wish my eyes were basilisks basilisks were mythical creatures whose glances killed the people they landed on. basilisks  so they could strike you dead$modern text$richard i wish they were so that i could die right now because at this point i live a living death. your eyes have made me cry shamefully like a child. i never cried before this. i didnt cry when my father york and my brother edward both wept at the death of my brother rutland whom clifford slaughtered. and when your warriorfather recounted the sad story of my fathers death pausing to sob twenty times in the course of the story so that all the bystanders ended up dripping tears like trees in a rainstormeven then i refused to cry. but your beauty has made me cry until i couldnt see. i never tried to win over a friend or enemy with sweet words. im too proud for that. but if your beauty is the reward for sweet talk ill talk.$anne looks at him with disgust.$dont curl your lips in scorn. they were made for kissing not for contempt. if your vengeful heart cant forgive me heretake my sword and bury it in my heart so that my soul which adores you can be free. i open myself to being stabbed. in fact i beg for death on my knees.$he opens his shirt to expose his chest and she points the sword toward it.$no dont pause because i did kill king henry though it was your beauty that made me do it. go ahead. and it was me who stabbed young edward though it was your heavenly face that set me to work.$modern text$anne lets the sword drop.$take up the sword again or take me up.$anne get up liar. though i wish you were dead im not going to be the one to kill you.$richard rising then tell me to kill myself and i will.$anne i have already.$richard you said it when you were furious. say it againjust one word and my hand which killed your lover out of love will kill your far truer lover. you will be an accessory to both crimes.$anne i wish i knew what was in your heart.$richard ive told you.$anne i fear that your words and your heart are both false.$richard then no man has ever been honest.$anne well then put your sword away.$richard tell me that youll accept my love.$anne youll know about that later.$modern text$richard but can i have some hope$anne id like to think all men have some hope.$richard please wear this ring.$anne ill take the ring but dont assume im giving you anything in return.$he places the ring on her finger.$richard see how my ring encircles your finger thats how your heart embraces my poor heart. wear both the ring and my heart because both are yours. and if i your poor devoted servant may ask you for one small favor you will guarantee my happiness forever.$anne whats that$richard please leave it to me to take care of the burial as i have more reason to mourn than you do. meanwhile go to my estate at crosby place. after i have performed the solemn burial rites for this noble king at chertsey monastery and cried with regret at his grave ill hurry to meet you. for various reasons that must remain secret please do this for me.$anne ill do it with all my heart. im happy to see youve come to repent for what youve done. tressel and berkeley come with me.$richard say goodbye to me.$modern text$anne its more than you deserve. but since youre already teaching me how to flatter you pretend ive said goodbye already.$anne and two others exit.$richard sirs take up the corpse.$gentleman toward chertsey noble lord$richard no to the whitefriars monastery. wait for me there.$everyone exits except richard.$has anyone ever courted a woman in this state of mind and has anyone ever won her as ive done ill get her but i wont keep her long. what i who killed her husband and his father managed to win her over when her hatred for me was strongest while shes swearing her head off sobbing her eyes out and the bloody corpse proof of why she should hate me right in front of her she has god her conscience and my own acts against me and i have nothing on my side but the ugly devil and my false looks. and yet against all odds i win her over ha has she already forgotten her brave husband prince edward whom i stabbed on the battlefield three months ago in my anger the world will never again produce such a sweet lovely gentleman. he was graced with lots of natural gifts he was young valiant wise and no doubt meant to be king.$modern text$and yet she cheapens herself by turning her gaze on me who cut her sweet princes life short and made her a widow on me though i am barely half the man that edward was on me though i am limping and deformed i bet ive been wrong about myself all this time. even though i dont see it this lady thinks im a marvelously goodlooking man. time to buy myself a mirror and employ a few dozen tailors to dress me up in the current fashions. since im suddenly all the rage it will be worth the cost. but first ill dump this fellow in his grave then return to my love weeping with grief. come out beautiful sununtil ive bought a mirror to admire my reflection in ill watch my shadow as i stroll along.$he exits.$modern text$queen elizabeth the lord marquess of dorset rivers and lord grey enter.$rivers be patient madam. im sure his majesty will recover his health soon.$grey youll only make him worse with all your worry. for gods sake let people comfort you. then youll be able to cheer him up.$queen elizabeth if he were dead what would happen to me$grey nothing more than that youd lose your husband.$queen elizabeth losing this husband will cause me all sorts of harm.$grey you have been blessed with an excellent son who will comfort you when the king is dead.$queen elizabeth but hes young and as long as hes too young to become king richard the duke of gloucester has power over him. richard loves neither me nor any of you.$rivers has it been decided that richard will be protector a protector acted for a king until he was old enough to rule on his own. protector $queen elizabeth its been decided though not yet officially announced. but thats what will happen if the king dies.$modern text$the duke of buckingham and lord stanley earl of derby enter.$grey here come lord buckingham and lord derby.$buckingham to queen elizabeth good afternoon your royal highness$stanley i hope god makes you happy again like you once were.$queen elizabeth my good lord derby the countess richmond would hardly say amen before the countess of richmond was stanleys wife she was married to edmund tudor. she is the mother of the earl of richmond the future henry vii who will prove to be an important character later in this play. amen to your kind words. but dont worry. i dont hold it against you even though shes your wife that shes so unfriendly and arrogant.$stanley please dont believe the false rumors youve heard about her feelings toward you or if theyre true then forgive her since shes only acting that way because shes sick not because she hates you.$queen elizabeth did you see the king today lord derby$stanley yes the duke of buckingham and i have just returned from visiting him.$queen elizabeth what are the chances of his getting better lords$buckingham madam keep up hope. he seems cheerful.$modern text$queen elizabeth god give him health. did you talk with him$buckingham yes madam. he wants to patch things up between richard and your brothers and between your brothers and hastings. he has summoned them all.$queen elizabeth i wish i could believe you that all was well but im worried that things can only go downhill from here.$richard hastings and dorset enter.$richard theyre out to get me and i wont stand for it which of you has been complaining to the king that i dont like them by god whoever is worrying the king with these lies doesnt love him very much. just because i dont know how to flatter and act nice to smile in mens faces and as soon as their backs are turned spread rumors about them to bow and scrape like a nobleman trained in the french court people have to think im their enemy. cant a plain man live and do no harm to anyone without being taken advantage of by a bunch of slick sneaky lowlifes$rivers which of us are you referring to$richard you who are neither honest nor good. when did i ever do you any harm or you or you or any of you damn you all the kingwhom i hope god will protect better than you would likecant get a minutes rest without you bothering him with your outrageous complaints.$modern text$queen elizabeth brother youve made a mistake. the king himself noticed your hatred toward my children my brothers and myself. no one had to point it out to himits obvious. he asked people to visit him. he wanted to find out the reason for your ill will so he could do something about it.$richard i cant tell whats going on. the world has become so bad that now little wrens have settled where eagles used to roost. since every peasant has been made into a nobleman many noblemen have been dragged down to the level of peasants.$queen elizabeth come come i know what youre referring to richard. you resent my friends' rise in society and my own. lets hope we never need your help for anything.$richard meanwhile were the ones who need you. my brother is imprisoned because of you i am disgraced and the nobility are held in contempt while those who two days ago werent worth a dime have suddenly been promoted.$queen elizabeth by the lord who raised me to this weighty post from the happy and carefree life i used to enjoy i promise you i never did anything to get the king to turn against the duke of clarence. in fact ive always been on his side and have pleaded for him. my lord youre doing me a huge injustice to suggest otherwise.$modern text$richard oh and ill bet youll also deny you were responsible for lord hastingss recent stay in prison.$rivers she may deny that my lord because$richard she may lord rivers everybody knows she may. she may do a lot more than that sir. she may help you to get many nice promotions and then deny she helped you claiming you won them on your own merits. what cant she do she could even$rivers she could even what$richard she could even what she could marry a king a bachelor a handsome young lad. certainly your grandmother had a worse match.$queen elizabeth my lord of gloucester i have suffered your blunt upbraidings and your bitterness toward me for too long. by god i will tell the king about these taunts. i would rather be a country serving maid than a great queen if it meant i could escape your scorn and constant harassment.$old queen margaret enters without being seen.$ive had very little joy as englands queen.$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear god give her even less joy i beg you elizabeth your honor your high rank and your position as queen queen margaret is the widow of king henry vi who was deposed and murdered by the yorkists. queen are all owed to me.$modern text$richard to queen elizabeth what youre threatening to tell the king go ahead and dont spare a single detail. look what i have said to you i will repeat in the presence of the king. if it means ill be sent to the tower so be it. its time for me to speak the truth. all the pains i took on king edwards behalf have been forgotten.$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear you devil i remember these pains all too well. you killed my husband henry in the tower and my poor son edward at tewksbury.$richard to queen elizabeth before you were queenin fact before your husband was kingi was a packhorse for his great affairs a weederout of his proud enemies a generous rewarder of his friends. in order to make his blood royal i spent my own blood.$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear yes and you spent better margaret is referring to the deaths of her own husband and son. better blood than his or your own.$richard to queen elizabeth in all that time you and your first husband sir john grey were fighting for the lancasters.and so were you rivers.elizabeth wasnt your first husband killed while fighting in queen margarets army at saint albans in case youve forgotten i want to remind you where you come from and what side you were on before you arrived here. and i want you to remember whom i fought for who i have been and who i am.$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear you were a murderous villain and you still are.$modern text$richard to elizabeth poor clarence in henry vi part  clarence constantly shifted his loyalties from the yorks his own family to th lancasters to which his fatherinlaw belonged. clarence abandoned his fatherinlaw a lancaster and broke his own oathmay jesus forgive him$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear may god take revenge on him$richard to queen elizabeth in order to fight on edwards side to help him win the crown. and now he is rewarded by being thrown in prison i wish to god my heart were made of stone like edwards is. or i wish edwards were soft and full of feeling as mine is so that he would let clarence go. i am too childish too innocent for this world.$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear hurry to hell then and leave the world alone you demon hell is where your kingdom is.$rivers my lord of gloucester in those busy days which youre bringing up now to prove were your enemies we followed the lawful king. if you were king we would do the same.$richard if i were king id rather be a peddler. the thought of being king doesnt appeal to me in the least.$queen elizabeth youre right to imagine that being this countrys leader brings no pleasure. as queen i have felt none.$modern text$queen margaret speaking so no one else can hear no pleasure for the queen indeed i am the real queen and the experience is completely joyless. i can no longer hold my tongue.$she moves forward so that everyone can see her.$hear me you wrangling pirates. youre quarreling over what doesnt even belong to youyou stole it from me which of you does not tremble when you see me if you arent trembling because you know i am queen and you are my subjects then youre shaking because you threw me from the throne to richard oh highborn villain do not turn away$richard ugly wrinkled witch what are you doing here$queen margaret only describing what you have ruined. or at least thats what i plan to do before i let you go.$richard werent you banished on pain of death$queen margaret i was. but i felt more pain from exile than i would have from being dead here at home. you richard owe me a husband and a son. the rest of you owe me a kingdom. and all of you owe me allegiance. the sorrow that i feel actually belongs to you and the high life you enjoy actually belongs to me. you stole it from me.$richard the curse my noble warriorfather richard refers to events shakespeare dramatizes in king henry vi part  act  scene . queen margaret has richards father the third duke of york killed. but before she kills him she sets a paper crown on his head to mock him and hands him a rag soaked in his son rutlands blood. he begs god to destroy her. warriorfather laid on you when you set a paper crown on his head just before slaying him has finally borne fruit. your scorn for him was so shocking that he cried rivers. to stop up his tears you handed him a rag soaked with the blood of his own child. god not us is responsible for punishing you for your bloody deed.$modern text$queen elizabeth god is just. he rewards the innocent.$hastings oh killing that child was the dirtiest most merciless deed there ever was$rivers tyrants themselves wept when they heard about it.$dorset everyone understood there would be a heavy payback.$buckingham even northumberland the earl of northumberland was an enemy of richards family the house of york. northumberland wept to see it.$queen margaret what were you all snarling before i arrived ready to catch each other by the throat like dogs but now that im here you turn your hatred toward me did the duke of yorks terrible curse have so much weight with god that god repaid him not only with henrys death and my lovely edwards death but with the loss of their kingdom and with my banishment too all because of what happened to that brat rutland if curses can pierce the clouds and enter heaven that easily then open up thick clouds and listen to my curses$modern text$queen margaret to queen elizabeth though your king did not die in battle let him die from overindulging his appetites as my husband was murdered to make your husband king. may your son edward who is currently the prince of wales die young and violently as payback for the death of my son edward the former prince of wales. and may you outlive your glory just as miserably as i have to make up for taking my position as queen. may you live long enough to mourn your childrens deaths and watch another woman enjoy the throne as i now watch you. let your happy days die long before you do. after many extended hours of grief may you die neither a mother a wife nor englands queen. rivers dorset and lord hastings you all stood by as my son was stabbed. for his sake i pray to god that none of you die a natural death but have your lives cut short by some unforeseen accident.$richard enough of your magic spells you hateful withered hag.$queen margaret and leave you out dont move dog. its your turn now. if heaven has any plagues beyond what i can drum up let it wait until your sins margaret wants richard to die only after committing the maximum number of sins so he can be guaranteed a greater punishment in hell. sins are piled high and then hurl them down on you you destroyer of a whole world of peace may conscience eat away at your soul constantly. may you suspect your true friends of being traitors and take the worst traitors as your closest friends. may you never sleep a wink except to dream of a hell full of ugly devils.$modern text$queen margaret you deformed prematurely born rooting hog you evil birth defect you insult to your mothers womb you hated disgrace to your fathers sperm you disgusting$richard margaret.$queen margaret richard.$richard yes$queen margaret i didnt call you.$richard i beg your pardoni thought it was me whom you were calling all those terrible names.$queen margaret yes i was but i dont want an answer from you. let me finish my curse.$richard ive finished it for you and it ends in margaret.$queen elizabeth hes turned your curse against you margaret.$queen margaret poor imitation queen why do you align yourself with this humpbacked spider when hes got you trapped in his deadly web fool youre sharpening a knife to cut yourself. the day will come when youll wish i could help you cast spells against this poisonous hunchbacked toad.$hastings woman stop your frantic curses and false prophesies before we run out of patience and do something bad to you.$modern text$queen margaret shame on you ive already run out of patience with you all.$rivers if you got what you deserved you would learn some respect.$queen margaret what i deserve is that you treat me like a queen and what you deserve is to act like my subjects. give me what i deserve and do your duty$dorset to rivers dont argue with her. shes crazy.$queen margaret enough from you mister youre being impertinent. unlike those born into nobility your claim to royalty is so recent that you hardly even know what it means to lose it. people in high positions are shaken by many blasts of wind and when they fall they shatter into pieces.$richard good advice indeed. take it to heart dorset.$dorset it applies to you as much as to me my lord.$richard yes and much more so. but i was born that high. like an eagle which builds its nest at the top of a high tree i play in the wind and am not afraid to look at the sun.$queen margaret but you turn that sun into a shadow. take my son for example. he is dead now. you put out his bright life forever. you are building your nest in our nest. oh god whos watching dont let him get away with this he won his position violently. let him lose it that way too.$modern text$buckingham stopif you cant be kind at least have some shame.$queen margaret how dare you talk about kindness or shame. to the others you have only been unkind to me and you have shamefully butchered my hopes. my kindness to you is to be outraged at what has happened and my sad sad shame is in what you have done to my life.$buckingham enough enough.$queen margaret oh noble buckingham ill kiss your hand to show my friendship and support for you. i wish only good things upon you and your noble family your clothes arent spattered with my familys blood and you arent affected by my curse.$buckingham no one here is affected by your curse because curses are just words with no power.$queen margaret i think they rise up to heaven and arouse god from his gentle sleep. so that only buckingham hears oh buckingham watch out for that dog richard when he seems to be fawning on you hes actually about to bite. and his poisonous bite kills. have nothing to do with him. beware of him. all the powers of sin death and hell are doing his bidding.$richard what is she saying my lord$buckingham nothing that interests me my good lord.$modern text$queen margaret what you ignore my kind advice and try to please the devil im warning you about oh just remember this another day when he splits your heart in two with sorrow. then youll say poor margaret was a prophet. richard will come to hate everyone here as you will come to hate himand as god will come to hate you all.$she exits.$buckingham her curses have made my hair stand on end.$rivers mine too. i dont understand why shes not locked up.$richard i cant blame her. she has been wronged too often. i regret what i have done to hurt her.$queen elizabeth i never caused her any harm as far as i know.$richard but you have all the advantages from the harm done. for my part i was too eager to do king edward good. he doesnt even seem to notice now. and look how hes repaid poor clarence for his loyaltypenned him up like a pig being fattened for slaughter. god pardon those who are responsible for clarences troubles.$rivers thats very virtuous and christian of you richard to pray for those who have done us harm.$richard i always pray for them to himself because they are none other than myself. if i cursed clarences wrongdoers id be cursing myself.$catesby enters.$modern text$catesby madam his majesty asks for you and for you duke of gloucester and for you my noble lords.$queen elizabeth catesby well be there soon.lords will you come with me$rivers we will wait on you your majesty.$everyone but richard exits.$richard incredible. i do the wrong and am the first to start quarrels. what i did in secret i blame on others. i cry about clarence whom i had imprisoned in front of these simple foolsnamely hastings derby and buckinghamand tell them that the queen and her allies roused the king against my brother clarence. they believe me and urge me to take revenge on rivers vaughan and grey. but then i sigh and quote a chunk of the biblehow god says do good in return for evil. ha dressing my outandout wickedness in scraps of scripture i look like a saint exactly when im most like the devil.$two murderers enter.$but quiet. here come the murderers ive hired. hows it going hardy reliable friends are you going to take care of this thing now$first murderer we are my lord. weve come to get the warrant so we can be let into his cell.$modern text$richard good thinking. i have it on me here. he hands over the warrant when youre done go to crosby place. but sirs do the job fast. and stick to your mission. dont let him plead for his life because clarence is a good talker and may make you pity him if you let him get started.$first murderer tut tut my lord were not going to stand around chitchatting. talkers arent good doers. rest assured that were going there to use our hands not our tongues.$richard when fools cry you remain stony. i like you guys. go straight to work. hurry now get the job done.$murderers we will my noble lord.$they all exit.$modern text$clarence and the keeper enter.$keeper why do you look so depressed today your grace$clarence oh i had a miserable night. i had such dark and terrifying dreams that i swear i wouldnt spend another night like that if it guaranteed me a whole lifetime of happy days.$keeper what was your dream tell me.$clarence i thought i had escaped from the tower and was on a ship to france with my brother richard who persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on deck with him. looking toward england we reminisced about the countless frightening experiences wed had in the wars between the yorks and the lancasters. as we were pacing the deck which was tipping heavily richard seemed to stumble and as i tried to grab hold of him and keep him from falling he knocked me overboard into the crashing waves. lord how painful it was to drown. the sound of the rushing water was terrible and so were the sights. i saw a thousand shipwrecks a thousand men whom fish had gnawed to the bone huge anchors chunks of gold heaps of pearls and precious jewelsall scattered on the bottom of the sea.$modern text$clarence some of the gems had wedged themselves like imitation eyes into the dead mens skulls. the fake eyes gazed dully at the bones scattered around.$keeper so you had time as you were dying to look around$clarence i thought i did and i often tried to die. but the terrible water always held me back. it wouldnt let my soul find its way to air but smothered it inside my gasping body. my body wanted so badly to vomit up my spirit that it almost burst.$keeper and didnt you wake up during this terrible agony$clarence oh no my dream went on even after i died. in fact the real nightmare had only just begun. with the help of the grim ferryman according to greek mythology an old man charon ferries the dead across the river styx to hades the underworld for the good and bad alike. shakespeare adds a certain christian flavor here to alter this tradition the underworld of clarences dream is hellish. ferryman that poets like to write about my soul crossed the river into the kingdom of endless night. the first to greet me there was my great fatherinlaw clarence abandoned warwick who fought for the lancasters to join forces with his own brother king edward iv. fatherinlaw  the famous earl of warwick. he cried aloud what terrible punishment can this dark realm devise for the oathbreaker clarence and he vanished. then a ghost like an angel with its hair spattered in blood wandered by and shieked$modern text$clarence clarence has arrivedlying cowardly clarence the ghost in clarences dream was prince edward queen margarets and king henry vis son. clarence helped kill prince edward. clarence  who stabbed me at tewksbury. grab him avenging spirits and torment him. with that a legion of ugly demons surrounded me and howled so loudly in my ears that i woke up trembling and for a long time thought i was still in hell.$keeper im not surprised it scared you my lord. it scares me just to hear you talk about it.$clarence oh keeper keeper the bad things ive done are finally taking their toll. i did them for edwards sakeand look how he rewards me.oh god if my prayers dont satisfy you and you have to avenge the wrongs ive done at least punish me alone please spare my innocent wife and childrenkind warden please stay with me for a while. im feeling very low and i need to sleep.$keeper ill stay my lord. may god bring you sleep$clarence sleeps$brakenbury the lieutenant enters.$brakenbury sorrow interrupts all hours and seasons. it turns everything aroundthe night into morning and noon into night. the only glory princes have are their titles.$modern text$instead of the pleasures we think theyre enjoying they experience a whole world of worries. it turns out the only difference between them and peasants is their fame.$the two murderers enter.$first murderer ho whos there$brakenbury what do you want fellow and how did you get in here$second murderer i want to speak with clarence and i came here on my legs.$brakenbury thats it nothing to add$first murderer well sir its better to say little than to be tedious. to second murderer show him our orders and keep your mouth shut.$brakenbury reads the paper$brakenbury it orders me to hand the noble duke of clarence over to you. i wont ask why because id rather not know than feel guilty if youre doing something you shouldnt be. here are the keys and there is the duke sleeping. he hands them the keys ill go to the king to let him know ive handed my prisoner over to you.$first murderer you may sir. thats a wise idea. goodbye.$modern text$brakenbury and the keeper exit.$second murderer what should i stab him while he sleeps$first murderer no. when he wakes up hell say we killed him like cowards.$second murderer when he wakes up why he wont wake up till judgment day.$first murderer okay so thats when hell say we stabbed him in his sleep.$second murderer that word judgment makes me feel a bit guilty.$first murderer what are you afraid$second murderer not of killing him because i have a warrant for it but of being damned for killing him which no warrant can protect me from.$first murderer i thought you were resolved to do this.$second murderer i am resolvedto let him live.$first murderer ill go back to the duke of gloucester and tell him so.$second murderer please just wait a minute. im hoping my holy mood will pass. it usually only lasts about twenty seconds.$first murderer how are you feeling now$second murderer actually im still feeling some pangs of conscience.$modern text$first murderer remember the reward were getting when the deeds done.$second murderer jesus lets kill him i forgot about the reward.$first murderer wheres your conscience now$second murderer oh in the duke of gloucesters wallet.$first murderer when he opens his wallet to give us our pay your conscience will fly out$second murderer it wont matter. let it fly out. no one will listen to it.$first murderer and what will you do if it returns to you$second murderer i wont bother with it. conscience makes a man a coward. if he steals it accuses him. if he wants to swear it restrains him. if he sleeps with his neighbors wife it exposes him. it blushes is easily embarrassed and stages regular uprisings in a mans heart. its just too much trouble. it once made me return a purse full of money that i foundit turns anyone who treats it decently into a beggar. it has been thrown out of all sorts of towns and cities it visits and anyone who wants to live well should learn to trust only himself and live without it.$first murderer my god now the thing is at my elbow persuading me not to kill the duke.$second murderer stop your conscience and dont listen to him. he wants to take over your thoughts and make you sad.$first murderer im strongwilled. he wont get the better of me.$modern text$second murderer spoken like a brave man who respects his reputation. shall we get to work$first murderer well hit him on the head with the handles of our swords then throw him in the wine barrel in the next room.$second murderer what an excellent ideahell soak up the wine$first murderer wait a moment. hes waking up.$second murderer strike$first murderer no first lets talk to him.$clarence wakes$clarence where are you keeper give me a cup of wine.$second murderer youll have wine enough my lord soon.$clarence in gods name who are you$first murderer a man like you.$clarence but not a member of the royal family like me.$first murderer and youre not loyal like us.$clarence your voice is loud and commanding but you look like a working man.$first murderer im speaking for the king but i look like myself.$modern text$clarence the things you say scare me your eyes look threatening. and why are you so pale who sent you here why are you here$second murderer to to to$clarence to murder me$both murderers yes.$clarence you barely have the heart to tell me so you cant possibly have the nerve to do it. besides how have i offended you my friends$first murderer you didnt offend us you offended the king.$clarence he and i will make up.$second murderer never my lord. so prepare to die.$clarence its your job in life to kill the innocent what did i do wrong wheres the evidence against me wheres the jury the judge the lawful proceedings the verdict who pronounced this death sentence before a court of law could even convict me for you to threaten to kill me is most unlawful. if you hope to have your sins forgiven by christs dear blood which he shed for our terrible sins you must leave and keep your hands off me. youll go to hell for the deed youre planning to do.$first murderer what we do we have been commanded to do.$modern text$second murderer and the one who commands us is our king.$clarence wrongheaded slaves the king of kings says in his ten commandments thou shalt not murder. will you defy god and obey a man be careful. god takes revenge on those who break his laws.$second murderer he does and now hes taking revenge on youfor breaking promises and for murder too. you took a holy oath to fight for king henry vi.$first murderer and like a traitor to god you broke that oath and savagely murdered king henrys young son.$second murderer whom you swore you would protect and defend.$first murderer how dare you tell us about gods laws when you have broken them so savagely yourself$clarence but for whose sake did i do that sick deed for my brother edwards sake. he couldnt be sending you to murder me for that sin because hes the one who asked me to commit it. he is as guilty as i am. if god will be revenged for this deed he will do it publicly. god doesnt need to use indirect or illegal means to kill those who have offended him.$modern text$first murderer then who were you working for when you killed brave young prince edward$clarence my brothers love the devil and my own anger made me do it.$first murderer well your brothers love our duty and your own crimes make us kill you.$clarence if you love my brother dont hate me. i am his brother and i love him very much. if youre doing this for pay go to my brother richard. he will pay you more for saving my life than edward will for killing me.$second murderer youre mistaken. richard the duke of gloucester hates you.$clarence no he loves and cherishes me. go to him from me.$first murderer we will.$clarence tell him that when our noble father the duke of york gave his three sons his blessing he never imagined that our friendship would come to this. remind richard of this and he will weep.$first murderer yes hell weep stones as he taught us to do.$clarence dont lie about my brother. he is kind.$modern text$first murderer yes as kind as snow to a harvest. come on youre fooling yourself. its richard who sent us here to slaughter you.$clarence it cannot be. when i left him he hugged me in his arms and swore between sobs that he would work to set me free.$second murderer well thats what hes doingmaking you free to enjoy heaven.$first murderer make peace with god for you must die my lord.$clarence you have enough holy feeling to advise me to make peace with god but youre willing to go to war with god by murdering me oh sirs consider this those who sent you to do this deed will hate you for doing it.$second murderer to first murderer what should we do$clarence relent and save your souls. if either of you were a princes son and you were imprisoned as i am now and two murderers like yourselves came to youwouldnt you beg for your life yes you would beg if you were in my position.$first murderer relent no. thats cowardly and womanish.$modern text$clarence no sticking to your plan is beastly savage devilish. to second murderer my friend i detect some pity in your eyes. please please take my side and argue for my life. what beggar wouldnt have sympathy for a prince reduced to begging$second murderer look behind you my lord.$first murderer take that and that. he stabs clarence if this wont do the job ill drown you in the wine barrel in the next room.$he exits with the body.$second murderer a bloody deed pontius pilate was the roman governor who ordered jesus christ to be crucified. as if to suggest that he was washing away his own guilt pilate washed his hands in public before the execution. bloody deed  and desperately executed. i wish i could wash my hands of this terrible murder like pilate.$first murderer returns.$first murderer whats going on what did you mean by not helping me by god im going to tell the duke how slack youve been.$second murderer i wish you could tell him i saved his brother. take the money yourself and tell him what i said. im sorry this duke was killed.$he exits.$modern text$first murderer im not. go coward that you are. well ill go hide the body in some hole until the duke gives orders for his burial. and when i get my reward ill get out of here. the truth about this will come out and i cant stick around then.$he exits.$modern text$trumpets sound. king edward iv enters sick accompanied by queen elizabeth dorset rivers hastings buckingham grey and others.$king edward iv well. now ive done a good days work. you must all keep up this united front. every day i expect a message from god to bring me away from here. now my soul can depart for heaven peacefully since my friends have made peace here on earth. rivers and hastings take each others hand. dont simply hide your hatred. swear your love for each other.$rivers taking hastingss hand i swear i have cleansed my heart of all hate. with this handshake i guarantee my love.$hastings on my honor i feel the same.$king edward iv make sure you mean what you say. otherwise god the ultimate king will uncover your lies and cause you to be the death of each other.$hastings on my honor i swear i love rivers with all my heart.$rivers and i love hastings with all my heart.$modern text$king edward iv to queen elizabeth madam youre not exempt from thisnor are you dorset nor you buckingham. you have had too many separate factions among you. my dear wife let lord hastings kiss your hand. and dont do it merely for appearances sake.$queen elizabeth take my hand hastings. from now on ill forget the hatred i used to feel for you.$hastings kisses her hand.$king edward iv dorset embrace hastings.hastings express your affection for the marquess of dorset.$dorset i swear i will never break this promise of love.$hastings and so do i my lord.$they embrace.$king edward iv now noble buckingham seal this alliance by embracing my wifes friends and make me happy in your unity.$modern text$buckingham to queen elizabeth if i ever turn my hatred toward your majesty and do not love and cherish you and yours may god punish me. may i find hatred where i most expect love. when i most need a friend and when im sure i have one make him treacherous and deceitful to me. i beg god to do all this whenever i fail to show love to you or yours.$they embrace.$king edward iv noble buckingham your promise is like medicine to my ailing heart. all we need to put the final touches on this future peace is for richard to appear.$buckingham and just in time here he comes with sir richard ratcliffe.$richard and ratcliffe enter.$richard good morning to my sovereign king and queen. noble peers how nice to see you.$king edward iv happy indeed the way we have spent the day. gloucester we have done deeds of charity turning enmity into peace and hate into love among these mistakenly angry nobles.$modern text$richard what blessed work my king. if theres anyone among this princely group who mistakes me for an enemyif by accident or in anger i have done anything to offend youi want to join with you in peaceful friendship. it kills me to be enemies with you. i hate it and want all good mens love. to queen elizabeth first madam i want there to be peace between you and me which i will buy with my obedient service to you. and peace with you my noble cousin buckingham if you ever felt any grudge against me and with you lord rivers and lord grey with you. in fact i want to get along with everyone who has frowned on me without good causedukes earls lords gentlemen everyone. there is not an englishman alive with whom im at odds anymore than a newborn baby would be. i thank god for my humbleness.$queen elizabeth today shall always be remembered as a holy day. if only all struggles ended this well. one more thing my dear majesty. please pardon our brother clarence.$richard why madam have i offered you my love only to be flouted in front of the king who doesnt know that the good duke is dead$they all start.$you do him wrong to laugh at his corpse.$modern text$king edward iv who doesnt know hes dead who says he is$queen elizabeth oh my god what a terrible world this is$buckingham do i look as pale as everyone else does lord dorset$dorset you do my good lord. everyone here has turned white.$king edward iv is clarence dead but i reversed the death sentence.$richard well the poor man died by your first order which was carried by a winged messenger. some tardy cripple must have taken the counterorder who came after clarence was already buried. its clear that someone less noble less loyal more bloodyminded than clarence but not a blood relation deserves as bad an end as my brother but he goes free.$lord stanley earl of derby enters.$stanley kneeling i ask a favor of you in return for the service ive done my king.$king edward iv please be quiet. my soul is full of sorrow.$stanley i will not rise until your highness hears me.$king edward iv then hurry up and tell me what you want.$stanley that you lift the death sentence on my servant who killed a rowdy and belligerent former servant of the duke of norfolk.$modern text$king edward iv i was willing to condemn my brother to death but you want me to pardon a peasant my brother didnt kill anyone. he was only to blame for some thoughts he had. but his punishment was bitter death. who pleaded with me to pardon his life who when i was in a rage kneeled at my feet and told me to reconsider who talked about brotherhood who talked about love who told me how the poor man abandoned the mighty earl of warwick to fight for me who told me how he rescued me in the field at tewksbury when oxford had me down saying dear brother live and be a king who told me how when we both lay in the field freezing to death he wrapped me in his own clothes and spent a numbingly cold night naked i forgot all of this in my brutish anger and not one of you had the grace to remind me. but when your servants get drunk and kill someone you go right down on your knees for pardon pardon. and though he doesnt deserve it i have to grant your request. but not one of you would speak up for my brother. and i didnt speak to myself on his behalf either. the best of you owed something to him in his lifetime but none of you would plead for his life. oh god i fear your justice will destroy me and all of these men and their families and mine because of this come hastings help me to my room. oh poor clarence.$modern text$king edward iv and queen elizabeth exit with several others.$richard this is what happens when you act rashly. did you notice how the queens guilty relatives turned pale when they heard about clarences death oh they continually urged the king to do it. god will revenge it. but come lords will you come with me to edwards room to comfort him$buckingham well come with you your grace.$they all exit.$modern text$the old duchess of york enters with clarences two children.$boy tell me good grandmother is our father dead$duchess no boy.$girl then why do you weep so often and beat your breast and cry oh clarence my unlucky son$boy why do you look at us and shake your head and call us orphans wretches castaways if our noble father is still alive$duchess my pretty children both of you misunderstand me. im lamenting the sickness of the king because id hate to lose himim not mourning your fathers death. what would be the point of crying over someone who was already dead$boy so youre admitting clarence my father is dead. my uncle the king is to blame for this. god will take revenge. i will pray every day that he does.$girl and so will i.$duchess quiet children quiet. the king loves you very much. innocent sweethearts you have no idea whos responsible for your fathers death.$modern text$boy yes we do grandmother because my good uncle richard told me. he said the king was forced by the queen to make up charges against my father that would send him to prison. when my uncle explained this to me he wept and hugged and kissed me. he told me i could rely on him as if he were my father and he said he would love me as if i were his child.$duchess ah its a shame that a liar can seem so nice hiding his wicked intentions under a mask of goodness. he is my son yes and im ashamed of him. but he didnt get his deceitfulness from my breast.$boy you think my uncle was lying grandmother$duchess yes boy.$boy i cant believe that. wait whats that noise$queen elizabeth enters with her hair undone. rivers and dorsetfollow.$queen elizabeth no one can stop me now from wailing and weeping about my terrible luck. i dont care if it kills me. i plan to fall into the blackest despair.$duchess why are you making such a scene$queen elizabeth im simply performing the violent tragedy that is my life edwardmy husband your son our kingis dead. why should we live now that our leader is dead why are the branches still living when the root is gone why arent the leaves withering now that the sap is all dried up$modern text$if you do intend to live then mourn. if youre going to die be quick about it so you can catch the kings departing soul or follow him like obedient subjects to his new kingdom of endless night.$duchess as the kings mother i have a large share in your grief. i have wept at my own good husbands death and only kept myself alive by looking at his sons the mirror images of him. but now these two mirrors of their princely father have cracked to pieces my sons are dead. and my only comfort is richard who is nothing like his father and only causes me shame. you may be a widow but youre also a mother. you have your children as comfort. but death has snatched my husband from my arms and plucked my two crutches edward and clarence from my feeble hands. since your woes are only a portion of mine i have every reason to surpass your lamentations and drown out your cries with my own.$boy to queen elizabeth ah aunt you didnt weep at our fathers death. how can we help you by crying for your sorrow$girl you didnt sympathize with us when we became orphans we wont cry for you$queen elizabeth i dont need your help in grieving. i have my own sources of misery. in fact all the worlds springs and oceans flow from my weeping eyes. i could drown the world. my poor husband my dear edward$modern text$children our poor father clarence$duchess my sons edward and clarence$queen elizabeth what support did i have other than edward and now hes gone.$children what support did we have besides our father and now hes gone.$duchess what support did i have besides my two sons and now theyre both gone.$queen elizabeth there has never been a widow who suffered such loss as me.$children there have never been orphans whove suffered what we have.$duchess there was never a mother who suffered so much loss. alas i am the mother of all these others' griefs. each of them has a single loss while i share them all. she weeps for edward and so do i while she does not weep for clarence though i do. these young children cry for clarence and so do i though they dont cry for edward as i do. alas all of you can turn to me with your sorrow because i feel all of it. i will comfort you by adding my own grief to your sorrow.$modern text$dorset to queen elizabeth calm down dear mother. god is unhappy that youve responded so unthankfully to his doings. in everyday life when a person is unwilling to pay back a loan that was generously offered hes considered ungrateful. how much worse it is when heaven is the lender as in your case$rivers be a careful mother madam and think about your son the young prince. send for him right away and have him crowned. your peace of mind depends on him. bury your sorrows in dead edwards grave and plant your hopes in prince edwards rise to the throne.$richard buckingham stanley hastings and ratcliffe enter.$richard sister calm down. all of us have reason to mourn the dimming of our shining star the king. but no good comes from all this wailing. oh mother forgive me. i didnt see you there. on my knee i humbly ask your blessing.$he kneels$duchess god bless you and make you obedient loving and kind.$richard he stands amen. to himself and make me die a good old man that should be the point of a mothers blessing. im surprised my mother forgot to make it.$modern text$buckingham you mournful princes and grieving gentlemen who have been sharing this burden of grief now its time to cheer each other up with love. though we have lost a generous king we are about to enjoy the benefits of a new king. we must preserve our goodwill toward each other and not break into factions again. i think a few members of the court should fetch the young prince from wales and bring him to london to be crowned our king.$rivers why only a few courtiers my lord of buckingham$buckingham because if many of us go there the hostility between us may break out again which would be very dangerous with the young prince so newly crowned. when you have a situation where everyone seems free to take off on his or her own its important that the heads of state keep a low profile. we wouldnt want the prince or his new authority to be undermined by squabbling factions.$richard the king made peace among all of us. i at least intend to stick to our agreement to get along.$rivers and so do i. i think we all do. but since our agreement is a recent development it shouldnt be put to the test which could happen if the coronation turned into a huge ceremony. so i agree with noble buckinghamonly a few should go to meet the prince.$hastings i think so too.$modern text$richard then were agreed. now we need to figure out which of us will go to meet him. madam and mother will you go to offer your support to this weighty business$everyone but buckingham and richard exits.$buckingham for gods sake my lord lets be sure to be part of the group that meets the prince. along the way ill find an opportunity to separate him from the queens proud relatives as step one in the plan weve discussed.$richard you are my other self my oracle my prophet my dear brother i plan to act like a child and do exactly what you say. to wales then for we will not be left out.$they exit.$modern text$two citizens enter through different doors.$first citizen good morrow neighbor whither away so fast$second citizen im telling you i hardly know myself. did you hear the news thats going around$first citizen yes that the king is dead.$second citizen bad news by god. the news is always bad. but this news is bound to make the world go mad.$a third citizen enters.$third citizen neighbors hello.$first citizen good day to you sir.$third citizen is it true that good king edward has died$second citizen yes sir its all too true god help us.$third citizen then gentlemen we can count on trouble.$first citizen no no with gods help his son will be king.$third citizen its bad news when a country is ruled by a child.$second citizen his counselors will govern as long as hes a minor and then hell take over. it shouldnt go so badly.$modern text$first citizen thats how it was with henry the sixth who was crowned in paris when he was only nine months old.$third citizen really but at that point the king had the benefit of excellent counselors. his uncles were good men and protected him.$first citizen well this king has uncles too on both his father and mothers side.$third citizen it would be better if they were all on his fathers side or that there were none at all on his fathers side. as it is the rivalry between his fathers and mothers relatives over who will be closest to the king is likely to endanger everyone if were not lucky.as it stands theres a struggle between the two sides for the princes attention. richard the duke of gloucester is very dangerous and the queens sons and brothers are haughty and proudit would be better for this ailing country if they were subjects not rulers.$first citizen come come were worrying about the worstcase scenario. im sure everything will be fine.$third citizen when the day turns cloudy wise men put on their coats. when leaves fall from the trees it means winter has arrived. when the sun sets whos too stupid to recognize its night when storms arrive early you can expect the harvest will be damaged. so if all turns out fine as you say its more than we deserve or i expect.$second citizen its true people are really worried. its hard to find a person who isnt.$modern text$third citizen its always like this in times of change. by some sort of deep instinct we always know when danger is approaching just as we know that a storm is coming when the sea swells. but leave it all to god. where are you all off to$second citizen the court has sent for us.$third citizen for me too. ill go with you.$they all exit.$modern text$the archbishop of york queen elizabeth her son the young duke of york and the duchessofyorkenter.$archbishop last night i hear they stayed in stony stratford. tonight they will rest in northhampton. theyll be here tomorrow or the next day.$duchess im dying to see the prince. i hope hes grown a lot since i last saw him.$queen elizabeth but i hear he hasnt. they say my son york has almost passed him in height.$york yes mother but i wish i hadnt.$duchess why dear child its good to grow.$york grandmother one night when we were eating dinner my uncle rivers mentioned that i had grown more than my brother. yes said my uncle gloucester small plants are graceful while ugly weeds grow fast. and since then ive wished i wouldnt grow so fast because sweet flowers are slow while the weeds grow in a hurry.$duchess well it certainly wasnt true for richard as a child he took such a long time to grow up that according to his rule he should have grown up into a gracious adult.$york and no doubt he is gracious madam.$modern text$duchess i hope he is but mothers get to have their doubts.$york hey if id remembered something about him i could have had a good comeback for my uncle touching on his growth worse than he touched on mine.$duchess what would you have said my young york do tell.$york indeed they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw on a crust of bread when he was two hours old. it took me two years before i had a single tooth. grandmother this would have been a biting joke.$duchess pretty york who told you about his teeth$york his nurse grandmother.$duchess his nurse why she was dead before you were even born.$york well if it wasnt her i dont know.$queen elizabeth a mischievous child. come come you are too clever for your own good.$duchess good lady dont be angry with the child.$queen elizabeth little pitchers have big ears.$a messenger enters.$archbishop here comes a messenger. whats the news$messenger my lord its news i wish i didnt have to report.$modern text$queen elizabeth hows the prince$messenger hes fine and healthy madam.$duchess what is your news$messenger lord rivers and lord grey have been imprisoned in pomfret. pomfret was a castle in northern england used for political executions richard ii was killed there. sir thomas vaughan was a chief member of prince edwards court. pomfret. so has sir thomas vaughan.$duchess who sent them there$messenger the powerful dukes gloucester and buckingham.$archbishop what did they do wrong$messenger ive told you everything i know. why the nobles were imprisoned and on what charges i dont know my gracious lord.$queen elizabeth oh no i see the downfall of my family. the tiger has seized the gentle deer a tyrant has begun to attack the weak innocent king. welcome destruction blood and massacre i can see how all this will end as clearly as if i was looking at a map.$modern text$duchess how many times have i had to live through cursed times of violent struggle my husband lost his life to get the crown and my sons' fortunes have been tossed up and down leaving me to rejoice over their victories and weep over their losses. and once one of them achieved the throne and had taken care of domestic quarrels they made war among themselves. its a preposterous outrage. let it end or let me die so i wont have to watch any more of it.$queen elizabeth to york come my boy lets go to sanctuary taking sanctuary meant going into a church where for a certain length of time people could be free from civil authority. sanctuary . madam farewell.$duchess wait ill go with you.$queen elizabeth you have no reason to.$archbishop to queen elizabeth my gracious lady go and take your money and belongings the archbishop had both religious and civic duties. by assigning the seal to the queen hes suggesting that he will treat her not her son or her brother inlaw richard as the lawful monarch. its not really the archbishops role though to reassign the seal. only the king can do that. belongings with you. for my part ill reassign the great seal of england to you and will take it upon myself to protect you. come ill conduct you to the sanctuary.$they all exit.$modern text$the trumpets sound. the young prince thecardinal catesby and others$buckingham welcome sweet prince to london the capital of the king.$richard welcome dear nephew king of all my thoughts. the tiring journey seems to have made you gloomy.$prince it wasnt the journey itself uncle but the troubles we encountered that made it wearisome and dull. i want more uncles here to welcome me.$richard sweet prince youre just an innocent child. you dont really understand how capable people are of trickery. all you know is what a man shows you which has little to do with what hes really thinking. those uncles that you wish were here were dangerous. your grace heard their saccharine words but didnt take note of their poisonous intentions. god protect you from them and from other false friends$prince god should keep me from false friends but they werent false.$richard my lord the mayor of london is here to greet you.$the lord mayor and his train enter.$modern text$lord mayor god bless your grace with health and happy days.$prince thank you my good lord thank you all. i thought my mother and my brother york would have met us on our way here long before now. and what a slug hastings is that he hasnt even arrived to tell us whether theyre coming$hastings enters.$buckingham and just in time here comes the sweaty lord.$prince welcome my lord. what isnt my mother coming$hastings god knows why but your mother and your brother have taken sanctuary in westminster abbey. your sweet brother wanted to come meet you but his mother wouldnt let him.$buckingham damn what a sneaky and spiteful course your mother is takinglord cardinal will you please persuade the queen to hurry and send the duke of york herego with him lord hastings and if she refuses take the boy from her by force.$cardinal my lord of buckingham if my weak skills of persuasion convince his mother to part with the duke of york you can expect him here shortly. but if she resists my mild pleas let god in heaven forbid us from disobeying the holy laws of the sanctuary and taking the child from her. i wouldnt commit so serious a crime for anything.$modern text$buckingham you are too inexplicably stubborn my lord too stuck on ceremony. in these less dainty times youre not breaking the laws of sanctuary to seize him. its only a sanctuary for those who really need protection or those who are smart enough to claim they do. the prince has done neither therefore in my opinion he isnt really protected by sanctuary. youre not breaking any holy laws to take him away. often i have heard of sanctuary men but until now ive never heard of sanctuary children.$cardinal my lord youve won me over this time. lord hastings will you go with me$hastings im coming my lord.$prince go as fast as you can.$cardinal and hastings exit.$say uncle richard if my brother comes where will i stay till my coronation$richard whatever seems best to you. if i can give you some advice if i were you i would stay in the tower for a day or two. then you can stay wherever best suits your health and entertainment needs.$prince of all places i dont like the tower julius caesar conquered britainwhich then became a part of the roman empire. tower . didnt julius caesar build it my lord$modern text$buckingham he started it my noble lord and succeeding generations rebuilt it.$prince is it on record that he built it or is it just word of mouth$buckingham on record my gracious lord.$prince well i think that even if it werent on record the truth would be remembered from one generation to the nextall the way to doomsday.$richard to himself as the saying goes those that are this wise when theyre this young wont live long.$prince what did you say uncle$richard i said when there are no written records a persons fame lasts for a long time. to himself like injustice iniquity or injusticewickednesswas a common figure in medieval morality plays which often personified the seven deadly sins. like richard iniquity favors double talk to serve his own wicked purposes. injustice  i get two meanings out of one word.$prince that julius caesar was a famous man. his courage helped his cleverness and his cleverness made sure that his reputation for being courageous outlived him. death didnt conquer this conqueror for he lives on in his fame even though hes dead. ill tell you what my cousin buckingham$modern text$buckingham what my dear lord$prince if i live to be a man ill win france in the hundred years war  the english invaded france in an attempt to make good on hereditary claims to the french throne. france again or die a soldier as honorably as i lived as a king.$richard to himself as the saying goes short summers often have an early spring. this smartypants wont live long.$young york hastings and the cardinal enter.$buckingham making good time heres the duke of york.$prince richard of york how are you doing my loving brother$york very well my supreme lordthats what i have to call you now.$prince yes brother i feel bad about that too. the man who might have kept that title died too soon and now it isnt worth nearly as much.$richard hows my nephew doing noble lord of york$york thank you for asking uncle. oh my lord you once said that lazy weeds grow fast. the prince has far outgrown me.$richard he has my lord.$york does that mean hes lazy$modern text$richard oh my handsome nephew i must not say that.$york in that case hes more obliged to you than i am.$richard he may command me as my king but you still have power over me as a relative.$york uncle please give me your dagger.$richard my dagger little nephew with all my heart.$prince are you begging brother$york from my kind uncle who i know will give it to me especially as its not worth much.$richard ill give you a greater gift than that nephew.$york a greater gift that must mean a sword.$richard yes gentle cousin if it were light enough for you.$york oh i see you will only part with lightweight presents. for more important things youll say no.$richard a swords too heavy for you to wear.$york i wouldnt think much of it even if it were heavier.$richard what do you want to wear my weapon little lord$york i do so i can thank you for what you called me.$richard whats that$modern text$york little.$prince the lord of york is always a bit perverse in his chatter. but uncle you know how to bear with him.$york you mean to bear me not to bear with me. uncle my brother makes fun of both of us. because im little like an ape professional jesters often carried apes on their shoulders. york may also be suggesting that richards humpback would provide a perfect spot for an ape to perch. ape  he thinks you should bear me on your shoulders like a fool.$buckingham to himself what a sharp mind this boy has to make up for his scorn toward his uncle he makes fun of himself as well. its amazing that hes so cunning at his age.$richard to prince my lord will you please continue on your way to the tower my good cousin buckingham and i will go to your mother and ask her to meet you there.$york to prince what youre going to the tower my lord$prince my protector richard insists on it.$york i cant sleep quietly in the tower.$richard why what are you afraid of$york my uncle clarences angry ghost. my grandmother told me he was murdered there.$modern text$prince im not afraid of dead uncles.$richard nor living ones i hope.$prince well i hope not. to york but come my lord. with a heavy heart thinking about my dead uncles i will go to the tower.$a trumpet sounds. everyone except richard buckingham and catesby exits.$buckingham richard dont you think this chattering little york was encouraged to taunt you by his sneaky mother in that outrageous way$richard no doubt no doubt. oh hes a dangerously clever boybold quickwitted capable. hes his mothers child from head to toe.$buckingham well enough about them.come here catesby. youve sworn to participate in our plot and to keep it a secret. what do you think wouldnt it be easy to convince lord hastings to join us in installing richard as king of england$catesby hastings loved the princes father so much that we wont be able to persuade him to do anything against the prince.$buckingham what about stanley wont he join us$catesby hell do whatever hastings does.$modern text$buckingham okay just do this noble catesby sound out lord hastings but make it seem as if youre just mulling over the idea that it hasnt been firmed up yet. invite him to come to the tower tomorrow for the coronation ceremony. if he seems game to our plan encourage him to join us and explain all our reasons. but if hes resistant and chilly then be like that too and break off the conversation. let us know how he responds. tomorrow were going to hold two separate meetings one for those who are with us and one for those who arent. youll have a lot to do in these meetings.$richard give my regards to hastings catesby. tell him the nest of dangerous enemies that plagued him for years will die tomorrow at pomfret. and tell him to give mistress after king edward died mistress shore became hastingss mistress. mistress shore one extra kiss to celebrate this good news.$buckingham good catesby do your work well.$catesby my good lords i plan to.$richard will we hear from you before bedtime catesby$catesby you will my lord.$richard youll find us both at crosby place.$catesby exits.$buckingham now my lord what are we going to do if we find that lord hastings wont go along with our plans$modern text$richard chop off his head. whatever we decide to do. and when im king remember to ask me for the earldom of hereford and all the possessions that go with it which my brother the king used to own.$buckingham i look forward to that present.$richard youll find ill give it to you very willingly. come lets have an early dinner so that we have time to work out our plans.$they exit.$modern text$a messenger enters and goes to hastingss door.$messenger knocking my lord my lord.$hastings offstage whos knocking$messenger a messenger from lord stanley.$hastings offstagewhat time is it$messenger four o'clock in the morning.$hastings enter$hastings cant lord stanley sleep$messenger i guess notfor good reason as youll soon hear. first he sends his regards.$hastings and then$messenger and then he said to tell you that tonight he dreamed the duke of gloucester cut off his helmetthat is his head. besides that he says that two meetings are going to be held tomorrow and something may be decided at one of them that may make you and him who are at the other sorry. he wants to know if instead of going to the meeting youll get on your horse and ride north with him to get out of harms way.$modern text$hastings go man return to your lord and tell him not to worry about the separate meetings. while he and i are at one my loyal servant catesby will be at the other so nothing will happen that we wont find out about. tell your master there is no sound basis for his worries. and as for his dreams im surprised hes so foolish as to trust the fantasies of a restless night. if we flee from the boar before the boar even pursues us well only make the boar angry and suspicious causing him to chase us when he never intended to. tell your master to get up and come here and well go together to the tower to meet the boar the boar refers to richard whose heraldic emblem worn on his armor to indicate his noble lineage was the boar. boar  who will treat us well as hell see.$messenger ill go my lord and tell him what you say.$he exits.$catesby enters.$catesby good morning my noble lord.$hastings good day catesby. youre up early. what news can you tell me in this fastmoving unsteady state of ours$catesby our world sure is spinning fast my lord. i believe it wont stop moving and stand upright till richard wears the wreath of the realm.$hastings what do you mean wears the wreath are you talking about the crown$modern text$catesby yes my good lord.$hastings ill have my head cut from my shoulders before ill see the crown so misplaced. but do you think thats what hes aiming for$catesby yes i swear and he hopes youll join his party to help. for that reason he sends you this good newsthat this very day your enemies the queens relatives will die at pomfret.$hastings well im not sorry to hear that because they have always been my enemies. but the idea that id give my support to richard and keep my master king edward ivs true heirs from the crownnever. god knows id die before id do that.$catesby well lets hope you stay in that noble frame of mind.$hastings in a year when things have calmed down ill laugh about how those who got king edward iv to hate me are now brought low. but as for nowbefore two weeks have gone by im going to send some people packing. they have no idea whats coming.$catesby its a horrible thing to die when youre not prepared for it my gracious lord.$hastings yes monstrous monstrous thats how it will be for rivers vaughan and grey. thats how it will be for some other men too who think theyre as safe as you and i who are wellloved by noble richard and buckingham.$modern text$catesby richard and buckingham have a high opinion of you. to himself so high theyll stick your head on the bridge london bridge where heads of traitors were displayed on poles to serve as warnings to the general populace. bridge .$hastings i know they do and i certainly deserve it.$stanley enters.$come on come on where is your spear for the boar man youre afraid of the boar but you go around without your spear$stanley my lord good morning. good morning catesby. go ahead and laugh at me but by jesus i dont like these separate meetingsi really dont.$hastings my lord my life is as important to me as yours is to you and it was never as precious to me as it is now. do you think i would be feeling as triumphant as i am if i didnt know that our situation was secure$stanley when the lords who are imprisoned at pomfret left london they also were in a good mood and supposed their situation was secure. and they also had no reason to worry. but you see how soon the day got cloudy for them. richards sudden hateful attack on them makes me worry. i hope to god im proven wrong well should we head to the tower the day is well on its way.$modern text$hastings come on lets get going. you know what my lord those men you just mentioned will be beheaded today.$lord stanley they deserved to keep their heads more than some people who have managed to keep their positions. but come my lord lets go.$a pursuivant pursuivant = junior officer pursuivant enters.$hastings go on ahead. ill talk with this good man.$stanley and catesby exit.$whats up man hows it going$pursuivant better since your lordship was nice enough to ask.$hastings i tell you man its better for me too than the last time we met here. then i was on my way to the tower where i was going to be locked up thanks to the false charges of the queens allies. but now i tell youkeep it to yourself thoughthose enemies of mine are being put to death today and im better than ive ever been.$pursuivant well lets hope your good fortune continues$hastings thanks a lot mister. here drink to me.$he throws the pursuivant some money.$pursuivant god be good to you$he exits.$modern text$a priest enters.$priest a nice coincidence my lord. im glad to see you.$hastings i thank you sir john with all my heart. i am indebted to you for your last sermon. by next week ill be able to pay you.$priest ill come to you your lordship.$hastings whispers in his ear.$the priest exits.$buckingham enters.$buckingham what talking with a priest hastings your friends at pomfret theyre the ones who need a priest. you on the other hand dont have any confessions you have to make.$hastings when i ran into this holy man those men you mentioned did come to mind in fact. are you headed to the tower$buckingham i am my lord. but i wont be there for long. ill be off before you are.$hastings yes probably because im staying for lunch.$buckingham to himself and for dinner too though you dont know it. to hastings come are you going$hastings ill follow you my lord.$they exit.$modern text$ratcliffe enters with armed guards. he leads rivers grey and vaughan to death at pomfret.$rivers sir richard ratcliffe let me tell you this. today you will witness a person die for truth duty and loyality.$grey to ratcliffe god protect the prince from all of you. youre a group of damned bloodsuckers$vaughan to ratcliffe youll live to regret this.$ratcliffe hurry up. your lives are over.$rivers oh pomfret pomfret oh you bloody prison fatal and threatening to noble lords within these guilty walls richard ii was hacked to death. and now to add more blood to its name were losing our innocent lives here.$grey now margarets curse has fallen on our heads for standing by and doing nothing when richard stabbed her son.$rivers she cursed richard then. she cursed buckingham then. she cursed hastings then. oh god remember to hear her prayer for them just as for us but dont kill my sister and her royal sons be satisfied dear god with our blood which is being spilled unjustly as you know.$modern text$ratcliffe hurry up. the hour of death is approaching.$rivers come grey. come vaughan. lets embrace they embrace and say goodbye until we meet again in heaven.$they all exit.$modern text$buckingham stanley hastings the bishop of ely ratcliffe and lovell enter with others and take their seats at a table.$hastings now noble lords the reason were meeting is to determine the day the prince will be crowned. in gods name speak. when should the royal day be$buckingham is everything ready for that event$stanley it is. all we have to do is name the day.$ely tomorrows a good day.$buckingham who knows what the lord protector thinks whos closest to him$ely you i think would best know what hes thinking.$buckingham we know each others faces but as for our thoughts he doesnt know any more about my thinking than i do about yours or hisor you do about mine. lord hastings you and he are close.$hastings thank you. i know he holds me dear but i havent asked him about the coronation and he hasnt told me. but you my noble lords may name a time and ill second it on the dukes behalf which i dont think hell mind.$richard enters.$modern text$ely right on cue heres the duke himself.$richard my noble lords and relatives good morning. i slept in. but i hope i didnt delay any important decisions.$buckingham if you hadnt shown up on cue my lord lord hastings was going to take your parti mean he was going to speak for youin the crowning of the king.$richard no one may be bolder than my lord hastings. he knows me well and loves me well.ely when i was last at your palace i saw some great strawberries in your garden. i beg you send someone to bring some of them.$ely yes my lord. with pleasure.$he exits.$richard buckingham i need to have a word with you. drawing him aside catesby has sounded hastings out and found the prickly gentleman so opposed to our plan that he actually said he would die before hed agree to have his masters son as he put it so devotedly lose the crown.$buckingham move to the other room my lord. ill come soon.$richard exits with buckingham following him.$modern text$stanley we have not yet set the coronation day. tomorrow in my opinion is too soon. i myself am not as wellequipped as i would be if the day were put off a bit.$ely returns.$ely where is my lord the duke of gloucester i have sent for the strawberries.$hastings richard is looking cheerful today. you always know hes got some plan that pleases him when he says good morning with such gusto. i dont think theres a man under the sun whos worse at hiding his love or hate than richard. you know his feelings immediately just by looking at his face.$stanley and what feelings did you see in his face today$hastings that hes not angry with anyone here. if he were he would have shown it.$stanley i pray to god he isnt.$richard and buckingham return.$richard tell me all of you what punishment does a person deserve who conspires to kill me with witchcraft and who has already plagued my body with black magic$modern text$hastings because i love your grace i say that whoever the offenders are deserve to die.$richard then see the evidence of their evil with your own eyes. he shows his arm look how ive been bewitched see how my arm has become like a withered treebranch this is the work of edwards wife that monstrous witch who is in league with that tramp shore. they have used witchcraft to harm me.$hastings if they have done this thing my noble lord$richard if you lover of that damned whore youre talking to me of ifs youre a traitor.off with his head. by saint paul i swear i wont eat lunch until i see him beheaded. lovell and ratcliffe make sure it gets done. the rest of you who love me come with me.$everyone but hastings ratcliffe and lovell exits.$hastings i pity england but not myself. i was too foolish. i might have prevented this. stanley dreamed the boar beheaded him and i laughed and refused to flee with him. three times today my horse stumbled and started when he looked in the direction of the tower as if he hated to carry me to this slaughterhouse. oh now i really need that priest who spoke to me today$modern text$hastings and i regret having bragged to the messenger about how my enemies were being butchered at pomfret while i as i said was in good standing with richard. oh margaret margaret your heavy curse has now landed on poor hastingss miserable head$ratcliffe hurry upthe duke wants to eat his dinner. make your confession short. hes eager to see your head.$hastings we spend more time seeking out the fleeting glories of this temporary world than looking to the permanent grace of god anyone who builds his hopes on air lives like a drunken sailor hanging on a mast ready with every dizzy nod of his head to tumble to the bottom of the sea. the things we worry about like good looks and possessions arent lasting and they dont matter.$lovell come come hurry up. its pointless to talk now.$hastings oh bloody richard miserable england i foresee for you the most frightening time you have ever experienced.come lead me to the block. bring him my head. those who smile at it will soon be dead themselves.$they all exit.$modern text$richard and buckingham enter wearing rusty hideouslooking armor.$richard tell me cousin i need to know if you can shake like youve got a fever turn pale all of a sudden and stop speaking in the middle of a wordas if you were driven crazy with fear.$buckingham oh please i can imitate the best tragic actor around. i can speak and then look all around and tremble and start at a mere piece of straw as if i were paranoid. frightening looks are also at my service as are fake smiles. anytime i need them theyre waiting to do my bidding. but has catesby gone$richard he has. but here he is back with the mayor.$the lord mayor and catesby enter.$buckingham lord mayor$richard watch out for the drawbridge richard and buckingham are pretending they are under attack. drawbridge over there$buckingham listen a drum$richard catesby look over the top of these walls to see if anyones there.$catesby exits.$modern text$buckingham lord mayor the reason we have sent$richard look behind you defend yourself there are enemies here.$buckingham god defend and guard us innocents against them$lovell and ratcliffe enter with hastingss head.$richard stay calm. theyre friendsratcliffe and lovell.$lovell heres the head of that notorious traitor the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.$richard i loved this man so much it makes me weep. i took him to be the plainest most harmless christian on earth. he was the book in which i recorded all of my most secret thoughts. he was so slick in covering over his plans that if it hadnt been for his love affair with shores wife i would never have suspected him.$buckingham well well he was the most covert traitor who ever lived. would you believe if we hadnt caught him this subtle traitor would have murdered the lord of gloucester and me in the council room today$lord mayor he would have$modern text$richard what do you think were turks or savages instead of christians you think we would have disobeyed the law and proceeded to kill this villain if englands peace and our own lives hadnt been at stake$lord mayor i hope nothing else like this ever happens to you this man deserved his death. and you my good lords were right to warn other traitors from trying the same.$buckingham i didnt expect any better from him once he got involved with mistress shore. but we had decided that he shouldnt die until you were able to come witness his execution. which was prevented by the haste of our friends lovell and ratcliffe here who went against what we intended somewhat in their hurry to protect us. if you could have heard the traitor speak for himself and confess the exact way he planned to murder us you could have told the citizens what terrible intentions he had though now theyre likely to misconstrue what we did and wail over his death.$lord mayor but my good lord the words of you and lord buckingham are as trustworthy to me as if i had seen and heard him speak myself. and do not doubt you honest noble princes that ill let our citizens know how fairly you proceeded in this case.$richard that is exactly why we wanted you here your lordshipto avoid the public carping and complaints.$modern text$buckingham but since youve come too late to see the execution as we intended at least let people know what you hear we intended. and so good lord mayor we bid you goodbye.$the lord mayor exits.$richard follow him buckingham. hes traveling at a gallop to the london meeting hall. there as soon as you have a chance drop the hint that edwards children are bastards. tell the citizens how edward put to death a citizen just because the citizen said he was going to make his own son heir to the crownwhen all the citizen meant was that he owned a tavern called the crown and was going to leave it to his son. and then point out what a lech edward was and what a bestial appetite he had for women which touched even the citizens' own servants daughters and wives. there was no limit to what his lustful eye and savage heart would prey on. and if you need to approach the subject of me tell them that when my mother became pregnant with the insatiable edward my noble father was fighting in france. with a little calculating its obvious that edward is not in fact my fathers childnot a surprising revelation if you consider how my father the noble duke looked nothing like this man. but only hint at this vaguely because as you know my mothers still alive.$modern text$buckingham dont worry my lord ill be as eloquent as if the golden crown im pleading for were for myself. goodbye my lord.$richard if things go well bring the crowd to baynards baynards castle was another of richards london estates. baynards castle where ill be surrounded by priests and learned bishops.$buckingham im off. around three or four o'clock look for news from the meeting hall.$buckingham exits.$richard lovell go as fast as you can to doctor shaw. to ratcliffe go to friar penker. both of you tell these men to meet me in less than an hour at baynards castle.$lowell and radcliffe exits.$now ill go inside and write out a secret order to keep clarences brats out of sight and to forbid anyone whatsoever from seeing king edwards sons.$he exits.$modern text$a scrivener scrivener = professional copier scrivener enters with a paper in his hand.$scrivener heres the indictment of the good lord hastings which has been written out in a clear hand like any legal document so it can be read aloud in public outside st. pauls cathedral. and look how well this sequence of events holds together after catesby brought the indictment to me last night i spent eleven hours copying it. the original took just as long to write out. so thats twentytwo hours. and yet five hours ago lord hastings was alive untouched free at liberty. what a backward world we live in why whos so stupid that he cant see through this fraud but whos so blind to the consequences of speaking out that hell admit what he knows the world is a bad place where you cant speak what you know.$he exits.$modern text$richard and buckingham enter through different doors.$richard so what did the citizens say$buckingham its incrediblethey didnt say a word.$richard did you mention that edwards children are bastards$buckingham i did. i talked about how he was engaged to lady lucy edward iv was engaged to elizabeth lucy and had a child with her before he married elizabeth grey. lady lucy  and how he was engaged to lady bona edward sent warwick to secure this french marriage and then backed out of it. lady bona through the help of the earl of warwick. i spoke of the unquenchable greediness of edwards desires and the way he forced himself on the wives of londoners. i mentioned the way he punished people harshly for minor offenses. i said he was not the son of the noble duke of york because your father was in france when he was conceived which explains why he doesnt have anything in common with his father. and then i suggested that you were the spitting image of your father both in the way you look and in the nobleness of your character. i went into all your victories in scotland your skill as a warrior your wisdom in peacetime your generosity your goodness and your exceptional modesty. indeed i left nothing out. and when my oration came to a close i asked those who loved their country to cry god save richard englands royal king$richard and did they$modern text$buckingham no god help me they didnt say a word. like silent statues or stones that breathed they just gazed at each other and turned as pale as the dead. when i saw this i scolded them and asked the mayor what this stubborn silence meant. he said that the people werent used to being spoken to except by the recorder recorder=a legal official recorder . so i urged the recorder to repeat my taleyou know the duke of buckingham said this buckingham meant that but nothing on his own authority. when he was done a few followers of my own at the far end of the hall hurled their caps in the air. some ten voices cried god save king richard i jumped on this slender opportunity and said thank you noble citizens and friends. this widespread applause and enthusiastic shouts make clear you stand behind richard. and then i broke off and quickly came away.$richard what blocks of wood they wouldnt say anything arent the mayor and his fellow citizens coming$buckingham the mayor is here at hand. pretend youre afraid my lord and dont speak until youre pleaded with. and make sure to carry a prayer book in your hand and to stand between two priests okay then ill have the grounds to build a holy sermon about why you should be king. but dont be easily won over. act like a virgin always answering no but taking it in the end.$richard im going now. if youre as good at pleading to them as i am at saying no to you this will definitely come to a happy end.$a sound of knocking from offstage.$modern text$buckingham hurry go up to the roof. the lord mayor is knocking.$richard exits.$the lord mayor and citizens enter.$welcome my lord. im twiddling my thumbs waiting for the duke to show up. i dont think he wants to be disturbed.$catesby enters.$here comes his servant. now catesby what does your lord say to my request$catesby my lord he asks that you please visit him tomorrow or the next day. hes inside in prayer with two reverend fathers. he doesnt want to be disturbed in his holy work by any worldly requests.$buckingham return to the gracious duke good catesby. tell him that the mayor some citizens and i have come to confer with his grace in matters of great importance concerning the general good.$catesby ill tell him right away my lord.$he exits.$modern text$buckingham ah my lord this prince is nothing like edward he is not lolling in bed but on his knees in prayer. hes not enjoying himself with a couple of prostitutes but studying with two learned priests. hes not sleeping to fatten up his lazy body but praying to nourish his attentive soul. england would be lucky to have this virtuous prince as king. but im afraid well never get him to agree to be king.$lord mayor but god forbid he says no to us$buckingham im afraid he will. here comes catesby again.$catesby returns.$whats up catesby what does your master say$catesby my lord he wonders why you have assembled such troops of citizens to speak with him since he had no idea they were coming. my lord hes afraid you mean him harm.$buckingham im sorry my noble brother is suspicious of me. by god im here because i love him. return and tell him so.$catesby exits.$when devoutly religious men are praying its hard to draw them out of it because they get lost in the wonder of their contemplation.$modern text$richard enters overhead between two bishops. catesby returns.$lord mayor see how he stands between two clergymen$buckingham two props of virtue for a christian prince to prevent him from ever becoming vain. and see he has a prayer book in each hand the signs of a holy man. most gracious prince of the famous house of plantagenet pardon us for interrupting your righteous christian prayer. please listen favorably to our request.$richard my lord you dont need to apologize. i beg you to pardon me. ive been so intent on serving god that ive kept my friends waiting. in any case what would you like$buckingham only what i hope will please god above and all good men on this island which currently has no king.$richard i suspect that i have committed some offence to the city and you have come to reprimand me for not knowing better.$buckingham you have my lord. i hope youll make up for it$richard why else would i live in a christian country if i cant ask forgiveness for my faults$modern text$buckingham then you should know that we take fault with your resigning the supreme seat the majestic throne the sceptered office of your ancestorsthe power and greatness that destiny and your noble birth have handed youto the wrong person. you arent respecting the lineage of your royal family. youre lost in sleepy thoughts and we have come to wake you to our countrys needs. this noble island has been compromised. she is scarred by the infamous deeds of king edward iv. her royal stock has been corrupted and nearly lost. we want that royalty remembered again. we heartily beg you in all your goodness to take upon yourself the responsibility and rule of this land not merely as a servant substitute or other lowly agent of the king but as the king himself. it is your birthright to be king. its for this reason that we are herethe citizens of england and your devoted friends. we strongly urge you on.$richard i cant tell which is the better course of action to leave in silence or to scold you. if i dont answer perhaps youll think im accepting the heavy responsibility you foolishly want to impose on me. but if i do speak and refuse your request then im guilty of reprimanding my friends who have been faithful and loving toward me. so ill speak to make clear i dont want the crown but also that i am grateful to you. here is my definitive answer thank you for your love but im going to have to turn down your weighty request because i dont deserve to be king. first of all even if all the obstacles were eliminated and my path led straight to the crownif it were truly my birthrighti would rather hide from my greatness than hide inside the greatness of the position itself and be smothered by it. my spirit is poor and i have so many terrible defects that as king i would be like a little boat tossed about on a mighty sea. so thank god there is no real need for me as i wouldnt be able to help you much. the royal tree has left us other fruit which with time will do just fine on the throne and make us all happy as king im sure. someone other than i has the right and the good fortune to be made king. god forbid that i snatch the crown from him.$modern text$buckingham my lord what youve said makes clear you have a conscience but your objections are trivial given the circumstances. you say that prince edward is your brothers son. we agree but not by your brothers wife. king edward was going to marry lady lucyyour mother can vouch for thatand then he was betrothed to bona the king of frances sisterinlaw. but both of these were put off by elizabeth grey a careworn mother of many children who had once been a beauty but was now a stressedout widow long past her prime. nevertheless under pretence of asking a favor of him she attracted his lustful eye and seduced him so thoroughly that he completely debased himself committing adultery with her. it resulted in this edward whom were polite enough to call prince. out of respect for the living ill restrain myself from telling you everything. but my good lord if you dont care about this country at least use your own pure lineage to rescue us from the current corruption of the royal line.$modern text$lord mayor yes my good lord your citizens beg you.$buckingham dont refuse the love we offer you.$catesby oh make them joyful grant their lawabiding request$richard alas why would you heap all these responsibilities on me i am unfit to rule and to be king. please dont take it badly but i cannot and will not give in to you.$buckingham perhaps you refuse our request out of love for your brothers son. you dont want to depose the child. we know how tender your heart is and what gentle kind womanly feelings you have for your relatives as well as for people from all walks of life. but listen if you wont become king well just get someone else to the disgrace and ruin of your family. we will not have your brothers son as king. on this note were leaving. come citizens. damn it im not going to beg anymore$modern text$richard oh please dont swear my lord of buckingham.$buckingham exits with citizens and lord mayor.$catesby call them back my lord and accept their request. if you refuse it the whole country will regret it.$richard would you tie me to a whole world of worries well call them back again. i am not made of stone i am affected by all these kind pleas though it goes against my conscience and my soul.$buckingham and the rest return.$buckingham my brother and you wise serious men since you intend to force me to take responsibility for these changing times whether i want to or not im going to have to be brave and endure the load. but if this imposition youve put on me happens to result in dark scandal or ugly reproach the fact that you forced me to accept this should clear me from blame. god knows and you may have noticed im not to eager to take on this job.$lord mayor god bless your grace we understand youre just doing it for us and well be sure to say so.$richard if you say that youll only be telling the truth.$modern text$buckingham then i salute you with this royal title long live richard englands worthy king$all amen.$buckingham will you be crowned tomorrow$richard whenever you want since youre the one who wants it.$buckingham tomorrow then we will wait on your grace. now well take our leavejoyfully.$richard to the bishops come let us get back to praying.farewell my cousin farewell noble friends.$they all exit.$modern text$queen elizabeth duchess of york and dorset enter on one side and anne the duchess of gloucester enters on the other leading clarences young daughter lady margaret plantagenet.$duchess whos this my granddaughter with her kind aunt the duchess of gloucester leading her by the hand now on my life the young child must be headed to the tower to greet the young princes whom she adores. daughter how nice to see you.$anne good afternoon$queen elizabeth the same to you good sister. where are you going$anne just to the towerim guessing for the same reason you are to salute the noble princes who are staying there.$queen elizabeth yes kind sister. we can all go together.$brakenbury enters.$and here comes the warden just in time. officer please tell us if you will how are the prince and my little son york$brakenbury theyre just fine my dear madam. but im sorryim not allowed to let you visit them. the king has strictly forbidden it.$modern text$queen elizabeth the king whos that$brakenbury i meant to say the lord protector.$queen elizabeth the lord keep him from the title of king richard has set boundaries between my love and theirs i am their mother. whos going to keep me from them$duchess i am their fathers mother. i will see them.$anne i am their aunt and i love them like a mother. so take me to see them. officer ill take the responsibility from you and the blame too.$brakenbury no madam no. i cant do this. i am bound by oath so please forgive me.$he exits.$lord stanley earl of derby enters.$stanley in just an hour from now duchess of york ill be saluting you as the mother of two beautiful queens. to anne come madam you must go straight to westminster abbey where you will be crowned richards queen.$queen elizabeth oh cut my bodicestaps so that my pentup heart can have some room to breathe or ill faint from this deadly news$anne cruel cruel news$dorset to queen elizabeth cheer up mother. how are you feeling$modern text$queen elizabeth oh dorset dont waste your time talking to me. leave. death and destruction are following at your heels. your mothers name has become a threat to her own children. if you want to outrun death go cross the sea to france and stay with richmond henry tudor the earl of richmond later to succeed richard as king henry vii. richmond  out of the reach of hell. go get out of here get out of this slaughterhouse. otherwise youll just increase the number of the dead and make me die the slave of margarets curse no longer a mother a wife or englands queen.$stanley madam your advice is wise and caring.dorset take advantage of the time you have. ill write to my stepson richmond on your behalf so that hell meet you on the way. but dont delay.$duchess o this evil wind that spreads nothing but misery. o my cursed wombits a deathbed really since richard came out of it. it has hatched a cockatrice the cockatrice was a mythical being that could kill with its gaze. cockatrice  whose gaze kills whatever it lands on.$stanley to anne come madam come. i was sent in a hurry.$anne i go unwillingly. i wish to god that the golden crown that ill have to wear were redhot steel and burned me straight through to the brain i wish i could be anointed queen with deadly venom not oil and that i would die before anyone even had a chance to say god save the queen$queen elizabeth go go poor soul. i dont envy your position. if you want to make me happy dont wish yourself harm.$modern text$anne no why the man im married to now came to me when hed barely washed the blood off his hands from killing my first husband that angel as well as my husbands sainted father whose corpse i was following to burial. im telling you when i looked at richards face this is what i wished i want you to be cursed for making me a widow so young. and when you get married let sorrow haunt your bed. and i hope your wifeif any woman is crazy enough to marry youis more miserable about the fact that youre alive as you have made me by killing my husband and then what before i even had time to repeat the curse my womans heart was taken captive by his sweet slick words. i became the victim of my own curse. since i married him i have not had one hours sleep in his bed. every night im awakened by his terrified annes father the earl of warwick fought on the opposite side from richard and the other yorkists in the wars between the lancasters and yorks. terrified dreams. it doesnt matter if i sleep though. he hates me because of who my father is. he will no doubt get rid of me soon.$queen elizabeth poor dear goodbye. i pity your situation.$anne no more than i do yours.$dorset goodbye. i know youre unhappy with the glory of becoming queen.$anne to elizabeth and goodbye to you the poor soul who has to leave that glory behind.$modern text$duchess to dorset go to richmond and good luck. to anne you go to richard. i hope good angels will protect you. to queen elizabeth you take sanctuary in the abbey and think good thoughts for us. i will go to my grave where i can look forward to peace and rest. i have witnessed eightyodd years of sorrow for each hour of joy ive experienced ive suffered a full week of misery.$queen elizabeth wait. look back at the tower with me. please you ancient building take pity on those tender babes locked inside your walls by envious rivals you are such a rough cradle for such little pretty ones. you are a rude ragged nurse and an old sullen playmate for such tender princes. please treat my babies well. i know i must look foolish saying goodbye to a building but im aching with sorrow.$they all exit.$modern text$trumpets play. richard enters already crowned and dressed as a king. buckingham catesby a page and others enter with him.$richard everyone stand aside.cousin buckingham.$everyone moves aside.$buckingham my gracious king.$richard give me your hand.$richard ascends the throne with buckingham at his side.$because of your advice and your help i have a high position now. but will i wear these honors for only a day or will i enjoy them for a long time$buckingham let them last forever.$richard oh buckingham now im going to test to see if youre truly made of gold. young prince edward is still alivewhat do you think im going to say next$buckingham go on my loving lord.$richard why buckingham i say i want to be king.$buckingham why you are king your highness.$richard ha am i king i guess i am. but edward is still alive.$buckingham true noble prince.$modern text$richard oh how bitter it is that edwardthe real true noble princeshould still be alive cousin you didnt used to be so thickheaded. shall i put it plainly i want the bastards dead. and i want it done right away. what do you say speak now and to the point.$buckingham your grace can do whatever he wants.$richard tut tut youve become rather icy. your friendliness toward me seems to be freezing over. tell me do i have your consent to kill them$buckingham give me a little breathing space my lord a little pause to think. ill let you know my answer shortly.$he exits.$catesby so only the attendant nearest him can hear the king is angry. see he bites his lip.$richard to himself i only want to deal with stupid fools and careless boys. i have no use for people who look at me insightfully. ambitious buckingham grows much too circumspect. boy$page my lord$richard do you know anyone who would kill someone for money$modern text$page my lord i know one unhappy gentleman who has more pride than money. money talks and would very likely get him to do anything.$richard whats his name$page his name is tyrrel my lord.$richard i know the man a bit. go bring him here boy.$the page exits.$to himself the thoughtful witty buckingham will no longer be privy to my innermost thoughts. has he held out for me for so long and without a moments doubt only to suddenly need some breathing room well so be it.$stanley enters.$look whos here whats the news with you$stanley you should know my loving lord ive heard that the marquess dorset has fled to brittany to the earl of richmond.$he stands aside.$richard come here catesby. spread the rumor abroad that anne my wife is very sick. i will make sure shes kept out of view. and find a poverty stricken gentleman who i can marry straightaway to clarences daughter. clarences son is dullwitted so im not worried about him. look at you standing there in a stupor i repeat spread the rumor that anne my wife is sick and likely to die. hurry up because its absolutely crucial that i destroy anything that may damage my position.$modern text$catesby exits.$to himself i must get married to my brothers daughter elizabeth of york daughter of queen elizabeth and king edward. she later married henry tudor earl of richmond. she was the grandmother of elizabeth i and considered by elizabethans to mark the start of the tudor reign. daughter . otherwise my kingdom stands on glass. murdering her brothers and then marrying her isnt the most foolproof way to secure my position. but im steeped so deep in blood by now that one sin has to follow the next. i have no tears of pity for anyone.$the page returns with tyrrel.$are you tyrrel$tyrrel james tyrreland your most obedient subject.$richard are you indeed$tyrrel test me my blessed king.$richard do you dare kill a friend of mine$tyrrel yes my lord but id rather kill two enemies.$richard well thats what you get to do. two great enemies in fact enemies to my peace of mind. tyrrel i mean those bastards in the tower.$tyrrel give me access to them and soon you wont have to worry about them anymore.$richard thats music to my ears. come here tyrrel.$tyrrel approaches richard and kneels.$by this token youll be admitted to their cell. get up and listen to me.$modern text$richard whispers to tyrrel.$thats all there is to it. as soon as the deed is done you will be in my favor and i will promote you.$tyrrel ill do it right away.$he exits.$buckingham returns.$buckingham my lord i have thought over the request you just made of me.$richard well it doesnt matter anymore. dorset has fled to the earl of richmond.$buckingham i heard the news my lord.$richard stanley richmond is your wifes son. get information from her.$buckingham my lord id want to have the gift you promised me on your honor the earldom of hereford and all the possessions that go with it.$richard stanley pay attention to your wifes doings. if she sends any letters to richmond you will be accountable to me for it.$buckingham what do you say your highness about my just request$modern text$richard as i remember henry the sixth prophesied that richmond would be king when richmond was only a foolish little boy. a king perhaps$buckingham my lord$richard how is it that the prophet didnt tell me at the time that i would kill him$buckingham my lord your promise of the earldom$richard richmond the last time i was in exeter the mayor kindly showed me the castle there and called it rougemont the words rougemont and richmond were pronounced similarly and both mean red hill. rougemont . the name startled me because an irish poet once told me that i would die soon after seeing richmond.$buckingham my lord$richard yes what time is it$buckingham im reminding your grace what you promised me.$richard well but what time is it$buckingham its almost ten o'clock.$richard well let it strike ten then.$buckingham why let it strike$modern text$richard because youre like the lowborn fellow who strikes the bellyou keep interrupting my thoughts. i am not in the giving mood today.$buckingham well then let me know whether you will give me the earldom some other time.$richard youre bothering me. im not in the mood.$everyone except buckingham exits.$buckingham is this really happening does he reward my dedicated service with such deep contempt did i work to make him king for this oh let me remember what happened to hastings and hurry to brecknock brecknock was buckinghams family estate in southeast wales. brecknock while i still have my head on my shoulders$he exits.$modern text$tyrrel enters.$tyrrel the tyrants bloody request has been met. it was the most ruthless massacre this country has ever been guilty of. dighton and forrest whom i hired to perform the butchery are used to killing people the bloody dogs. but they melted with tenderness and human compassion weeping like children when they described what theyd done. the tender babes lay like this said dighton. like this said forrest with their innocent white arms around each other. their lips like four red roses on a stalk touched. a prayer book lay on their pillow which said forrest almost made me change my mind. but oh the devilthere he stopped talking and dighton took up where he left off we smothered the perfect most sweet work of nature. the two men were both destroyed by remorse. they couldnt speak. so i left them to bring the news to the murderous king. and here he comes.$richard enters.$here he comes.health to you my king.$richard kind tyrrel will your news make me happy$modern text$tyrrel if my doing what you told me to makes you happy then be happy because i did it.$richard but did you see them dead$tyrrel i did my lord.$richard and buried noble tyrrel$tyrrel the towers chaplain has buried them but to tell you the truth i dont know where.$richard tyrrel come back shortly after dinner and tell me the details of their deaths. in the meantime think about how i can do you good and give you what you want. see you soon.$tyrrel i humbly say goodbye.$tyrrel exits.$richard ive locked up clarences son and matched his daughter with a poor fellow. edwards sons have been carried off by the angels and anne my wife has bid good night to the world. now i go a jolly thriving wooer to marry my brother edwards young daughter elizabeth because i know richmond has his eye on her. he wants to win the crown by way of marrying her.$ratcliffe enters.$modern text$ratcliffe my lord$richard is the news good or bad that you enter without knocking$ratcliffe bad news my lord. the bishop of ely has fled to richmond and buckingham backed by a hardy welsh army is on the march. his army is growing.$richard ely joining richmond troubles me more than buckingham and his quickly assembled army. come ive heard that frightened analysis only serves to delay action and delay can lead to ruin. so my method is going to be to move as quickly as fire. come lets gather an army. the best strategy is to head right to the battlefield. when traitors challenge us to fight its best to act fast.$they exit.$modern text$old queen margaret enters.$queen margaret so now the good times have ripened and grown rotten. ive lurked in the shadows here to watch the downfall of my enemies. ive been watching the terrible prologue to a scene that i hope will prove dark and tragic. ill head to france soon. its time to hide wretched margaret. whos coming$$queen elizabeth and the duchess of york enter.$queen elizabeth ah my poor princes ah my tender babes my flowers who didnt even get a chance to bloom. if your gentle souls are still flying in the air and have not yet landed where they will remain forever hover around me with your airy wings and hear your mothers lament.$queen margaret hover about her and tell her she got what she deserved with her children dead before their time.$duchess ive been crazed with so many miseries that my tongue has tired of lamenting and gone mute. edward plantagenet why are you dead$queen margaret to herself one plantagenet pays for the other. one edward dies to pay a debt for the other edward who died.$modern text$queen elizabeth will you abandon such gentle lambs god and throw them to the wolves have you ever slept before while such a terrible deed was done$queen margaret to herself surewhen my husband holy harry harry = henry vi harry  died and when my sweet son died.$duchess sitting down sight has gone blind life is as dead as a ghost. this is a mournful sceneits a shame to the world when someone like me who should have died long ago still lives. as a short summary and record of an unbearable life ill settle my restless bones on englands lawful ground sitting down which broke the law when it got drunk on the blood of the innocent$queen elizabeth sitting down beside her oh if only the earth would offer me not just a seat for mourning but a grave. then i would bury myself not just rest my bones. oh who has any reason to mourn except us$queen margaret if the oldest grief is the most revered then mine should have the most weight here. let my sorrow have the upper hand. if you can allow for comparison sitting down with them consider your losses next to mine. i had an edward till a richard killed him and i had a harry till a richard killed him. on your side you had an edward till a richard killed him and you had the young richard york till a richard killed him. so i guess were equal.$duchess i had a richard toonamely my husbandand you killed him. i had my son rutland and you helped kill him.$modern text$queen margaret you had a clarence too and richard killed him. your womb let loose a hellhound that hunts us all to death. that dog who was born with sharp teeth for lapping up the blood of lambs who had teeth before he even had eyes is the worlds worst tyrant making the eyes of a whole kingdom red with weeping. he destroys gods handiwork and will send us to our graves. oh righteous god how can i thank you enough that this meateating mutt preys on his mothers children and forces her to join others in their grief$duchess o harrys wife do not triumph in my sorrow with god as my witness i swear i have wept for yours.$queen margaret bear with me. i am hungry for revenge and now i plan to gorge myself on it. your son edward who stabbed my son edward is dead. to even the balance your grandson edward is also dead with young york thrown in because both your grandsons arent equal to my one son. your clarence who stabbed my edward is also dead. and the audience to this insane playthe adulterer hastings as well as rivers vaughan and greyhave been sent early to their graves. richard a fiendish spy for hell itself still lives but only long enough to buy souls to send below. soon very soon he will meet his ghastly and well deserved end. when he dies the earth will gape open hell will burn hotter devils will roar and saints will pray to get him out of here fast. i pray that god ends his life before i die so i can say the dog is dead$modern text$queen elizabeth oh you prophesied that the time would come when i would want your help in cursing that humpbacked spider that hideous toad$queen margaret back then i called you a poor imitation queen a badly reproduced copy of what i was a pretty prologue for the tragedy that was about to follow a woman who was lifted high only to be hurled down to hell a mother only teased with two beautiful children who would soon die. i said you were a mere shadow of what a queen once was a garish target to be aimed at again and again an empty symbol of dignity without any substance a mockery of a queen only there to fill in a role. and i was right because wheres your husband now your brothers your two sons your source of joy who kneels at your feet now and says god save the queen what noblemen are bowing and scraping to flatter you now and where is your throng of followers once youve laid out all of these losses its clear whats left. in place of a happy wife theres a miserable widow. instead of a joyful mother heres a woman who cries at the mention of her children. for one who bestows favors on others heres one who has to beg for favors. instead of a queen we have a poor woman with a crown of worries. she who mocked me now is mocked by me. she who once ordered everyone about is now obeyed by no one. your fortune has fallen. now you have only the memory of what you were which tortures you when you consider what youve become. you once stole my position now you get to have the grief that goes with it. now like an ox you carry half my heavy burden of griefhere ill give you the rest. farewell yorks wife. goodbye queen of tragic misfortune. your english sorrows will make me smile in france.$modern text$queen elizabeth you who are so skilled in cursing stay awhile and teach me how to curse my enemies.$queen margaret dont sleep at night and dont eat during the day. compare what youve lost with what you suffer now. remember your children as being sweeter than they actually were and think of the man who killed them as worse than he is. making your loss greater makes the person who caused it worse. think like this all day and youll learn how to curse.$queen elizabeth my words are dull. enliven them with yours$queen margaret your misery will make them sharp and piercing like mine.$she exits.$duchess what good does it do to respond to catastrophe with a lot of words$queen elizabeth words are a lot of useless breath like lawyers who wont stop arguing for their sad clients like a worthless inheritance or like poor speechmakers who wont stop speaking. but give words a chance. though they wont help in any other way at least they make us feel better.$duchess if thats true then dont be tonguetied. come with me and lets smother my fiendish sonwho smothered your two sweet sonsin bitter words.$a trumpet plays.$i hear his battle drums. dont stint on your words.$modern text$they rise$king richard enters with his followers including casteby.$richard whos blocking the way$duchess the woman who might have blocked you from all the murders youve committed by strangling you in her cursed womb.$queen elizabeth are you hiding your forehead with a golden crown when if there was any justice in this world it should be branded with the murders you committedyour slaughter of the prince who held that crown and of my sons and my brothers tell me you villainous lowlife where are my children$duchess you toad where is your brother clarence and his son little ned plantagenet$queen elizabeth where are the noble hastings rivers vaughan grey$duchess where is kind hastings$richard play trumpets a call to arms drums dont let the heavens hear these chattery women abuse the lords anointed king. play i say$trumpet and drums play military music.$either be calm and polite or ill drown you out with the music of war.$duchess are you my son$modern text$richard yes i thank god my father and yourself.$duchess then patiently listen to my impatience.$richard madam im a bit like you in that i cant tolerate a tone of disapproval.$duchess oh let me speak$richard go ahead but i wont listen.$duchess ill be gentle and mild.$richard and brief good motherim in a hurry.$duchess are you that impatient god knows i waited for you in anguish pain and agony when i gave birth to you.$richard and didnt i finally arrive to comfort you$duchess no by god you know perfectly well you arrived on earth to make it my hell. your birth was incredibly painful you were a fussy and difficult baby as a schoolboy you were frightening wild furious and caused me despair as a young man you were daring bold and enterprising and in your maturity you have been haughty bloody and treacherousboth more mild and more harmful than before. so what hour of comfort have i ever had in your company name one.$modern text$richard i guess none except humphrey humphrey hour is an obscure reference though shakespeare is probably playing off the expression to dine with duke humphrey which meant to go hungry. richard is saying in effect the only comfort you ever had was an hour you had without me at breakfast time when you were hungry. humphrey hour who once invited you to have breakfast without me. if i be such a disgrace in your eyes let me march on and not offend you. strike up the band$duchess please listen to me.$richard youre too bitter.$duchess just listen this once. ill never speak to you again.$richard so be it.$duchess either you will die as you should before youve had a chance to win this battle or i will die from grief and age and never look upon your face again. so take with you my heaviest curse which i hope wears you out in battle even more than your heavy suit of armor will. i pray that the little souls of edwards children will whisper to your enemies and promise them success and victory. you are violent and your end will be violent. your life was shameful and let your death be too.$modern text$she exits.$queen elizabeth though i have far more reason i dont have as much energy to curse you. but i say amen to everything she said.$richard wait madam. i need to speak a word with you.$queen elizabeth i have no more royal sons for you to murder. as for my daughters richard they will become praying nuns not weeping queens. so dont aim at them.$richard you have a daughter named elizabeth who is virtuous and beautiful aristocratic and full of grace.$queen elizabeth and does she have to die for this oh let her live and ill ruin her manners and her beauty. so that she may live ill say i cheated on edward and that she is not really his child.$richard dont wrong her birth. she has royal blood.$queen elizabeth to save her life ill say she doesnt.$richard her life is only safe if shes really of royal blood.$queen elizabeth yes as safe as her brothers' lives were.$richard they were born under unlucky stars.$queen elizabeth the stars werent the problem. bad friends were.$richard you cant escape a bad destiny.$modern text$queen elizabeth true when a king who defies god is choosing that destiny. my children would have enjoyed a better death if god had blessed you with a purer life.$richard you speak as if i had killed my nephews.$queen elizabeth nephews indeed cheated by their uncle of comfort kingdom relatives freedom and life. whichever hand literally stabbed their tender hearts youre the one who gave the order. no doubt the murderous knife was blunt till it was sharpened on your stony heartyou reveled in my lambs' bloody guts. but constant expression of wild grief will only make it tame so im not going to say any more about my boys until ive gouged your eyes out with my bare hands. like a sailboat that has lost its sails i will throw myself on your rocky bosomand get torn to pieces.$richard madam if i do as well as i think im going to do in these dangerous violent wars you and your relatives will have more good at my hands than youve ever had bad$queen elizabeth what good does heaven have in store that can do me any good now$richard the advancement of your children noble lady.$queen elizabeth advancement to some scaffold to lose their heads.$richard no advancement to the dignity and height of honor to a high imperial kind of glory.$modern text$queen elizabeth flatter me in my mourning tell me what dignity or honor you could possible bring to any child of mine$richard the dignity of everything i own. in fact i will give a child of yours everything plus myself provided you forget the wrongs you imagine i have done to you.$queen elizabeth well explainbut do it fast so that your puny store of kindness isnt used up by talking about it.$richard then know that from my soul i love your daughter.$queen elizabeth i believe it.$richard what do you believe$queen elizabeth that you love my daughter to spite your soul. thats the way you loved my brothers. and thats the way i thank you for it.$richard dont be so quick to twist my meaning. i mean that i love your daughter with all my soul. i intend to make her queen of england.$queen elizabeth tell me who will be the king$richard the one who makes her queen of course. who else should it be$queen elizabeth what you$richard yes exactly. me. what do you think madam$modern text$queen elizabeth how would you woo her$richard thats what i want to find out from you who knows her best.$queen elizabeth and will you learn from me$richard madam with all my heart.$queen elizabeth okay then. do this send her a pair of bleeding hearts. make clear they come from the man who killed her brothers. write edward and york on them. that will get her to weep. then present her with a handkerchief like the one margaret gave your father which was steeped in his son rutlands blood. tell her this handkerchief sopped up the blood of her sweet brothers body and urge her to dry her weeping eyes with it. if this encouragement doesnt move her to love you send her a description of your other noble deeds. tell her how you secretly dispensed with her uncle clarence her uncle rivers and for her sake her good aunt anne.$richard come come youre making fun of me. this is not the way to win your daughter.$queen elizabeth there isnt any other way unless you took on another form and became someone else.$richard but suppose i did all the things you named out of love for her.$queen elizabeth then she has no choice but to hate you as you purchased her love with murder.$modern text$richard whatever has already been done cant be undone now. men act imprudently sometimes then realize their mistakes when they have time to think about them. if i took the kingdom from your sons ill give it to your daughter to make up for it. if i have killed your children i will have children with your daughter. a grandmother is loved hardly less than a mother is. your grandchildren will be just one step removed from your own childrenthey share your character your blood and require the same effort minus that one night of labor like that which you suffered through for your own daughter. your children caused you trouble in your youth but mine will bring you comfort in your old age. the only loss youve had is that your son was not king. because of that loss your daughter will be queen. i cant make up for everything that id like to so accept such kindness as i can offer. your son dorset who fled in fear to join an army in france against me could come home to high promotions and great dignity. the king who calls your beautiful daughter wife will call dorset brother. and you will be the mother to a king again with all the miseries of unhappy times not just repaired but also improved. indeed we have many good days to look forward to the tears you have shed will be transformed into pearls. your happiness will be like a loan that has grown through interest to ten times its original size. go then mother to your daughter.$modern text$give her the benefit of your experience and prepare her to hear me court her. make her aspire to be queen. tell the princess about the sweet silent hours of joy there are in marriage. and when my army has chastised the petty rebel that stupid buckingham i will return wreathed in victory crowns and lead your daughter to a conquerors bed. she will be the only victor over my triumphs. she will be the ruler of a caesar.$queen elizabeth what should i say to her that her fathers brother wants to be her husband or should i say its her uncle or should i describe you as the one who killed her brothers and her uncles how can i describe you that will make you appeal to the young woman and will also agree with god the law my honor and her feelings$richard claim fair englands peace depends on this alliance.$queen elizabeth she will purchase that peace with an everlasting war.$richard tell her that the king who has the power to command people asks her.$queen elizabeth he asks her to do what god forbids the church forbid marriage between uncle and niece. forbids .$richard say she will be a high and mighty queen.$queen elizabeth only to watch that title become worthless as her mother has.$richard say i will love her everlastingly.$modern text$queen elizabeth but how long will ever last$richard until her beautiful lifes end.$queen elizabeth but how long will her beautiful life last$richard as long as heaven and nature extend it.$queen elizabeth as long as hell and richard want it.$richard tell her that i her king am her lowly subject.$queen elizabeth but she your subject hates such a king.$richard be eloquent on my behalf.$queen elizabeth an honest tale succeeds best when it is told simply.$richard then tell her my loving story in simple terms.$queen elizabeth you cant tell a story simply when its a lie.$richard your answers are too shallow and too hasty.$queen elizabeth oh no my reasons are deep and as permanent as death. theyre buried as deep as my poor infants in their grave.$richard dont harp on that point madamits past.$queen elizabeth i will harp on it till my heartstrings break.$richard now by st. george my knighthood and my crown$queen elizabeth the first you profaned the second you dishonored and the third you stole.$modern text$richard i swear$queen elizabeth by nothing because this is no oath. st. george loses his holiness once you have sworn by him youve ruined the emblem of the knighthood and the crown lost its kingly glory once you stole it. if you want me to believe something youll swear to then swear by something you havent wronged.$richard then by myself$queen elizabeth youve misused yourself.$richard now by the world$queen elizabeth its full of your ugly wrongdoings.$richard by my fathers death$queen elizabeth your life has dishonored his death.$richard why then by god$queen elizabeth you wrong god most of all. if you had been afraid to break an oath with him you wouldnt have ruined the united front the king my husband created before he died and you wouldnt have killed my brothers. if you had been afraid to break an oath with him the crown you are currently wearing would have graced the head of my child and both princes would still be alive not preyed on by worms. what can you swear by now$modern text$richard by the future.$queen elizabeth youve already wronged that by what you did in the past. i myself have many tears to cry in the time to come because of what youve done. there are children living whose fathers you have slaughtered. when they are grown they will wail about a childhood in which no one watched out for them. there are parents living whose children you have butchered they are now old withered plants who will moan over their losses as they grow old. dont swear by the future because youve ruined it before it has even arrived.$richard may i only do well in these dangerous battles if my intention to repent and prosper is sincere let me destroy myself let heaven and destiny deprive me of happy hours let day remain dark and night sleepless and let me have nothing but terrible luck if i do not love with a pure heart clean devotion and holy thoughts your beautiful royal daughter. my happiness and yours lie in her. if i do not win her death desolation and decay will descend on this land and on me you herself and many a christian soul. ruin cannot be avoided unless i marry her. it will not be avoided unless i marry her. therefore good motheri must call you thatadvocate for me. plead with your daughter about what i will be not what i have been. dont talk about my just desserts but about what i will deserve. tell her how necessary this marriage is at this time and dont be smallminded about such important plans.$modern text$queen elizabeth shall i be tempted by the devil$richard yes if the devil tempts you to do good.$queen elizabeth shall i forget the wrongs youve done to me so that i can be the mother of a king again$richard yes if your memories do you no good.$queen elizabeth yet you killed my children.$richard but in your daughters womb i will bury them. in that rich nest they shall grow again to console you.$queen elizabeth should i go convince my daughter to marry you$richard and be a happy mother by doing so.$queen elizabeth im going. write to me very soon and ill let you know what she thinks.$richard give her a kiss from me her true love. and so goodbye.$queen elizabeth exits.$weakwilled fool shallow fickle woman$ratcliffe enters with catesby following.$hello whats the news$modern text$ratcliffe my noble king a powerful fleet of ships sails on the western coast. many former friends of ours have gathered to meet the fleet and arent willing to beat it back. word is that richmond is the navys admiral. the ships are drifting off the coast sails unfurled only waiting for buckingham to help them come ashore.$richard someone who can ride fast go to the duke of norfolk norfolk was a york loyalisthe stood behind edward iv and richard iii and he died fighting for richard. norfolk . you go ratcliffe or catesby. where is catesby$catesby here my good lord.$richard catesby fly to the duke.$catesby i will my lord as fast as i can.$richard ratcliffe come here. ride to salisbury. when you get thereto catesby stupid distracted rascal why are you still standing there why havent you left for the dukes$catesby first mighty king tell me what you want me to tell him.$richard oh right good catesby. tell him to gather together the greatest army he can muster in a hurry and meet me right away at salisbury.$catesby im off.$he exits.$modern text$ratcliffe what would you like me to do at salisbury$richard why what is there to do before i get there$ratcliffe your highness just told me that i should ride there before you.$richard i changed my mind.$stanley enters.$stanley what news do you have$stanley nothing that you want to hear my lord but nothing so bad that i cant mention it.$richard well how nice a riddle neither good nor bad. why do you go around in circles when you could get to the point once again whats the news$stanley richmond is sailing on the sea.$richard let him sink there so the sea will cover him lilylivered coward whats he doing there$stanley i dont know mighty king. i can only guess.$richard well what do you guess$stanley that stirred up by dorset buckingham and morton hes coming to england to claim the crown.$modern text$richard is the throne empty is the army without a leader is the king dead the empire dispossessed what heir of the york family is there alive other than myself and who is englands king but an heir of the great york therefore tell me what is he doing at sea$stanley unless its what i said your majesty i have no idea.$richard unless hes coming to be your leader you cant guess why the welshmans richmond was a descendent of the welshman owen tudor. welshmans coming you plan to revolt and join him im afraid.$stanley no mighty king do not distrust me.$richard where is your army then to beat him back where are your tenants and your followers arent they at this very moment on the western shore helping the rebels land safely from their ships$stanley no my good lord my friends are in the north.$richard then theyre cold friends to me. what are they doing in the north when they should be in the west serving their king$stanley they havent been commanded to go to the west mighty king. if your majesty would like ill muster up my friends and meet you wherever and whenever you like.$richard yes you want to go join richmond. but im not going to trust you.$modern text$stanley most mighty sovereign you have no reason to doubt my friendship. i was never disloyal and i never will be.$richard then go gather your men but leave behind your son george stanley. make sure your faith is firm or he has little chance of keeping his head.$stanley treat him as my loyalty toward you calls for.$he exits.$a messenger enters.$messenger my noble king my friends have informed me that sir edward courtney and his brother the haughty bishop of exeter are now in devonshire devonshire a county in southwest england devonshire  where they have assembled an army.$a second messenger enters.$second messenger my king the guildfords in kent kent a count ysoutheast of london kent have armed themselves and every hour new associates flock to their aid and their army increases.$a third messenger enters.$third messenger my lord the duke of buckinghams army$richard enough you owls the cry of the owl was thought to be a death omen. owls  do you have nothing but songs of death he strikes the third messenger take that until you bring me better news.$modern text$third messenger the news i have to tell your majesty is that buckinghams army has dispersed from sudden floods and heavy rainfall. buckingham himself has wandered away alone to who knows where.$richard i beg your pardon. heres some money to make up for that blow i gave you. he gives money has any intelligent friend of ours offered a reward to whoever catches the traitor$third messenger yes your highness.$a fourth messenger enters.$fourth messenger its been reported that sir thomas lovell and lord marquess dorset have assembled an army in yorkshire yorkshire a town in northern england yorkshire  my lord. but i bring your grace this comfort a storm has dispersed the navy from brittany. and richmond who is in dorsetshir dorsetshire a county on englands south coast dorsetshir e sent a boat to shore to ask the men on the banks if they were on his side yes or no. they said they were with buckingham. richmond didnt trust them. he hoisted sail again and sailed back to brittany.$richard lets keep marching since were prepared to fight. even if we dont fight foreign enemies well beat down these rebels at home.$catesby returns.$modern text$catesby your majesty the duke of buckingham has been capturedthats the best news. the fact that the earl of richmond has landed in milford milford haven is on the coast of wales. milford with a mighty army is less good news but it must be told.$richard away toward salisbury while were talking here a royal battle could be won and lost. someone deliver the order that buckingham be brought to salisbury. everyone else march on with me.$a trumpet plays.$they all exit.$modern text$stanley and sir christopher enter.$stanley sir christopher relay this message to richmond my son george stanley is penned up in the bloody boars sty. if i revolt off goes young georges head. my fear of that prevents me from helping richmond at this time. but tell me where is the noble richmond now$christopher at pembroke or at harfordwest in wales.$stanley which noblemen have joined him$christopher sir walter herbert a renowned soldier sir gilbert talbot sir william stanley oxford the highly feared pembroke sir james blunt rice ap thomas with a valiant crew and many other famous and powerful noblemen. they plan to head straight to london assuming they dont encounter any resistance on the way.$stanley giving him a paper return to your lord. give him my best regards. tell him the queen has given her heartfelt consent to his marriage to her daughter elizabeth. and these letters will let him know what my thinking is. goodbye and take care.$they exit.$modern text$buckingham enters with sheriff and guards leading him to his execution.$buckingham wont king richard let me speak with him$sheriff no my good lord. so be calm.$buckingham hastings and edwards children rivers and grey holy king henry and your fine son edward vaughan and all who have died from underhanded corrupt fiendish injustice if your angry souls are witnessing this moment through the clouds enjoy the revengelaugh at my ruin this is allsouls a catholic day of prayer for souls stuck in between heaven and hell allsouls day fellows isnt it$sheriff it is my lord.$buckingham why then its my bodys doomsday. today im going to get what i said i wished would happen to me if i was ever false to king edwards children or his wifes allies. this is the day im going to get what i wished for when i wished that the person i most trusted would betray me. this this allsouls' day is my just desserts. i tried to play games with god and he turned my fake prayer on my head giving me for real what id asked for as a joke.$modern text$this is how god forces wicked men to turn their swords against themselves. margarets curse has come true. when richard has split your heart in two with grief she said youll know that margaret was a prophetess. come sirs bring me to this block of shame. i have done wrong so i will suffer wrong. i have been blamed because i deserved to be.$they all exit.$modern text$richmond oxford blunt herbert and others enter with drummers and flag bearers.$richmond fellow soldiers and my loyal friends suffering under that tyrant richard we have marched all the way to the center of england without encountering any opposition. and now we receive encouraging news from my stepfather stanley richardthat violent greedy boar who roots through your summer fields and ripening vines guzzles your warm blood and makes his trough in your disemboweled belliesis now near the town of leicester only one days march from us here in tamworth tamworth is in central england. tamworth . in gods name lets continue on in high spirits my courageous friends. our aim is to achieve everlasting peace from this one violent war.$oxford every mans conscience is a thousand swords against this murderer.$herbert i suspect his friends will join us.$blunt he has no friends except those who are too afraid to defy him. in his greatest need even they will desert him.$richmond all to our advantage. so in gods name lets march. hope with good cause is swift it flies as fast as a swallow. it turns kings into gods and men of lower rank into kings.$they all exit.$modern text$richard dressed in his armor enters with norfolk surrey and others.$richard lets pitch our tents right here in bosworth field. my lord of surrey why do you look so sad$surrey my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.$richard my lord of norfolk$norfolk here most gracious king.$richard norfolk were going to have a few blows right$norfolk weve got to give them and take them my lord.$richard put my tent up ill lie here tonight. but where will i lie tomorrow well it doesnt matter. does anyone know the number of the enemys troops$norfolk six or seven thousand at most.$richard why our troops amount to three times that. besides the kings name is a tower of strength the opposition doesnt have that advantage. put up my tent come noble gentlemen let us look at our battle plan and get some experienced officers to help us figure out the best strategy. lets be disciplined and not delay because tomorrow is a busy day.$they all exit.$modern text$richmond sir william brandon oxford dorset herbert blunt and others enter on the other side of the stage. some soldiers pitch richmonds tent.$richmond the sunset was golden and left a bright track in the sky which indicates that tomorrow will be a good day. sir william brandon you will carry my flag. bring some ink and paper to my tent and ill draw a model of our battle appoint each leader to his particular command and carefully divide up our small army. my lord of oxford you sir william brandon and you sir walter herbert are going to stay with me. the earl of pembroke will stick with his regiment. good captain blunt tell the earl goodnight from me and tell him that by two in the morning i would like him to visit my tent. one more thing before you go bluntwhere is lord stanley lodging do you know$blunt unless ive mistaken his battle flags which im sure i havent his regiment lies at least half a mile south of the kings mighty army.$richmond if its possible to do this without putting yourself in danger dear captain blunt say goodnight to him from me and give him this important note.$he hands him a paper$blunt upon my life my lord ill do it. have a restful night$modern text$richmond good night dear captain blunt.$blunt exits.$come gentlemen lets discuss tomorrows action in my tent. the night air is too raw and cold for us to stay outdoors.$richard norfolk ratcliffe catesby and others enter in richards tent.$richard what time is it$catesby its dinnertime my lord. its nine o'clock.$richard im not going to eat dinner tonight. give me some ink and paper. is the visor of my helmet working better now and has my armor been put in my tent$catesby yes my lord. everythings ready.$richard my good man norfolk hurry to your post. be careful whom you choose as guardsmake sure theyre trustworthy.$norfolk im off my lord.$richard get up early tomorrowat the sound of the larknoble norfolk.$norfolk i will my lord.$he exits.$richard catesby.$modern text$catesby yes my lord$richard send a junior officer to stanleys regiment to tell stanley to bring his men here before sunriseif he wants to see his son george alive.$catesby exits.$to soldiers get me some wine. get a soldier to stand watch outside my tent. saddle my white horse surrey for battle tomorrow. make sure the shafts of my lances are solid but not too heavy. ratcliffe$ratcliffe yes my lord$richard did you see the gloomy lord northumberland$ratcliffe thomas the earl of surrey and he were moving from troop to troop around twilight cheering up the soldiers.$richard good im satisfied. give me some winei dont feel as energetic as i used to. set it down. is my ink and paper ready$ratcliffe it is my lord.$richard make sure my guard is on duty and leave me alone. ratcliffe around midnight come to my tent and help me put on my armor. now leave me alone as i said.$ratcliffe and the other attendants exit. richard sleeps.$modern text$stanley enters and goes to richmonds tent where lords and others are waiting on him.$stanley let fortune and victory be yours$richmond i wish you all the comfort that such a dark night as this can offer noble fatherinlaw. tell me how is my mother$stanley your mother sends her blessings. she prays continually on your behalf. enough about thatmorning will be here soon. to be briefas the occasion requiresprepare to fight early in the morning when your future will be decided. i cant do everything i want to but ill help you as well as i can. but i cant be too obvious about being on your side without risking the life of your stepbrother young george. if im seen helping you george will be killed right in front of my eyes. farewell. the lack of time and the risk im under will have to keep us from bonding and catching up on each others news the way we usually would after not seeing each other for so long. i hope we have the time some day again goodbye. be brave and do well$richmond good lords escort him to his regiment. im going to try to take a nap despite my racing thoughts so that exhaustion wont get the better of me tomorrow when ill need to ride as if my horse had wings. again good night kind lords and gentlemen.$modern text$everyone exits except richmond.$oh god whose side i think im fighting on look kindly on my forces. fuel them with dangerous fury so they can crush the enemy. make us your agents of revenge so we can praise you when were victorious before i fall asleep i entrust my soul to you. defend me god both when im asleep and when im awake. he sleeps.$the ghost of prince edward king henry vis son enters.$ghost of prince edward to richard i will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow. remember how you stabbed me at tewksbury when i was just a young man. despair and die to richmond be cheerful richmondbutchered princes fight for you. i king henrys son will provide you with comfort.$$the ghost of king henry vi enters.$ghost of king henry vi to richard when i was still alive you punctured my body the body of gods blessed king full of holes. remember the tower and me there. despair and die harry the sixth commands you to despair and die to richmond because you are virtuous and holy you must be the conqueror harry who prophesied that you would be king comforts you in your sleep live and prosper$he exits.$modern text$the ghost of clarence enters.$ghost of clarence to richard i hope i weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow its me drowned to death in a nauseating barrel of wine. its me poor clarence whom you betrayed to death tomorrow in battle think of me and drop your useless sword. despair and die to richmond offspring of the house of lancaster the wronged heirs of york pray for you. good angels protect your fight live and prosper$he exits.$the ghosts of rivers gray and vaughan enter.$ghost of rivers to richard i will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrowi rivers who died at pomfret. despair and die$ghost of grey to richard think about grey and despair$ghost of vaughan to richard think about vaughan and drop your lance from fear and guilt. despair and die$all to richmond awaken and have faith that the wrongs richard carries in his heart will defeat him awaken and win the day$they exit.$the ghosts of the two young princes enter.$modern text$ghosts of princes to richard dream about your nephews smothered in the tower. let us rest in your heart as heavily as lead richard and drag you down to ruin shame and death your nephews' souls command that you despair and die to richmond sleep richmond sleep in peace and wake in joy. good angels will protect you from the boars attacks live and give birth to a whole happy race of kings edwards unlucky sons want you to flourish.$they exit.$the ghost of hastings enters.$ghost of hastings to richard you violent guilty man wake up full of guilt and end your days in a bloody battle think about lord hastings. despair and die to richmond quiet untroubled soul wake up arm yourself fight and win for beautiful englands sake$he exits.$the ghost of anne enters.$ghost of anne to richard richard your wife your wretched wife anne who never enjoyed a quiet hour of sleep with you now fills your sleep with disturbing thoughts. tomorrow in battle think of me and fall on your sword despair and die to richmond you quiet soul sleep a quiet sleep. dream of success and happy victory. your enemys wife is praying for you.$she exits.$modern text$the ghost of buckingham enters.$ghost of buckingham to richard i was the first to help you to the crown and the last to feel the effects of your tyranny. think of buckingham when youre fighting tomorrow and die terrified of the sins youve committed tonight dream of bloody deeds and death. tomorrow when you lose heart fall into despair and then death. to richmond i died before i could help you as i was hoping to. but be cheerful and dont worry. god and good angels fight on your side and richard will fall at the height of his false pride.$he exits.$richard starts up out of his dream.$richard give me another horse bandage my wounds have mercy jesuswait i was only dreaming. oh cowardly conscience how youre torturing me the candles burn bluethat means its the dead of night. im sweating and trembling with fear. but what am i afraid of myself theres no one else here. richard loves richard that is theres just me and myself here. is there a murderer here no. yes i am. then run away. what from myself yes to avoid taking revenge on myself. unfortunately i love myself. why did i do anything good to myself oh no. alas i hate myself instead because of the hateful deeds ive committed. i am a villain. but im lying im not a villain. fool speak well of yourself. fool do not flatter yourself.$modern text$give me another horse bandage my wounds have mercy jesuswait i was only dreaming. oh cowardly conscience how youre torturing me the candles burn bluethat means its the dead of night. im sweating and trembling with fear. but what am i afraid of myself theres no one else here. richard loves richard that is theres just me and myself here. is there a murderer here no. yes i am. then run away. what from myself yes to avoid taking revenge on myself. unfortunately i love myself. why did i do anything good to myself oh no. alas i hate myself instead because of the hateful deeds ive committed. i am a villain. but im lying im not a villain. fool speak well of yourself. fool do not flatter yourself.$ratcliffe enters.$ratcliffe my lord.$richard damn it whos there$ratcliffe ratcliffe my lord its me. the rooster has already crowed twice. your friends are up and buckling on their armor.$richard oh ratcliffe i had a terrifying dream what do you think will my friends prove loyal$ratcliffe no doubt my lord.$richard oh ratcliffe im afraid im afraid$ratcliffe no my good lord dont be afraid of dreams.$modern text$richard by st. paul ghosts have struck more terror in my soul tonight than ten thousand of worthless richmonds soldiers could dressed up in their most swordproof armor. its not yet daylight. come with me ill spy under the tents to see if any of my own people plan to desert me.$they exit$richmonds lords enter his tent and go to where he is sitting.$lords good morning richmond.$richmond pardon me lords and gentlemen who stayed awake. youve caught me oversleeping.$a lord how did you sleep my lord$richmond since you left ive been enjoying the sweetest sleep and most promising dreams ive ever had my lords. i dreamed the souls of the people richard murdered came to my tent and promised me victory. i tell you i feel very jolly remembering such a beautiful dream. how late is it lords$lords its almost four.$richmond why then its time to put on my armor and instruct the troops. to his soldiers i cant tell you much right now loyal countrymen because we dont have time. but know this$modern text$we have god and a good cause on our side. the prayers of saints and those that richard wronged support us like highwalled fortresses. other than richard even those whom we fight against would rather we won. because who is this man they follow truly gentlemen a violent tyrant and a murderer who rose to his high position by shedding blood and kept the position the same way. he rose to the top by means of others and then slaughtered them. hes like a worthless stone who only seems like a valuable gem because hes on the throne where he doesnt belong. he has always been gods enemy. and when you fight gods enemy god will protect you. if you struggle to bring down a tyrant you will sleep peacefully when the tyrant is killed. when you fight against your countrys enemies you will be paid for your efforts with your countrys wealth. if you fight to protect your wives your wives will welcome you home as conquerors. when you free your children from the sword your grandchildren will repay you in your old age. so in the name of god and all the good that will come of this battle in the middle ages noblemen taken in battle often could go free afterward if they paid the enemy. richmond says if richard captures him he will die rather than pay for his freedom. battle  march with your flags high and draw your swords. as for me if i fail the only ransom i will offer the enemy is my corpse. but if i succeed every one of you will share in the profit. play boldly and cheerfully drummers and trumpeters. heres to god and saint george to richmond and victory$they all exit.$modern text$richard ratcliffe attendants and soldiers enter.$richard what did northumberland say about richmond$ratcliffe that he was never trained as a soldier.$richard thats true. and what did surrey say to that$ratcliffe he smiled and said the better for us.$richard hes right and thats how it is.$the clock strikes.$read the time there. give me an almanac. looking in an almanac did anyone see the sun today$ratcliffe i didnt my lord.$richard then it refuses to shine. according to this almanac it should have risen an hour ago. itll be a black day for somebody today. ratcliffe$ratcliffe my lord$richard the sun will not appear today. the sky frowns and scowls on our army. i wish there wasnt so much dew on the ground. so the sun wont shine today well why should that be worse for me than it is for richmond the same heaven thats frowning on me looks gloomily on him.$modern text$norfolk enters.$norfolk get ready my lord. the enemy is making its appearance on the battlefield.$richard hurry hurryprepare my horse. tell lord stanley to bring his army. i will lead my soldiers to the field and the battle formation will be like this the vanguard will extend in a line that is equal parts horsemen and foot soldiers. the archers will stay in the middle. john duke of norfolk and thomas earl of surrey will lead the horsemen and foot soldiers. ill follow in the center of the troop formation which ill defend with my best horse and with saint george on my side as well what do you think norfolk$norfolk a good plan warrior king. i found this pinned to my tent this morning.$he shows richard a piece of paper.$$richard reads jackie of norfolk dont be too bold for dick your master has been betrayed. something the enemy devised. go gentleman every man to his command. dont let babbling dreams frighten usconscience is just a word that cowards use to intimidate the strong. the strong fight we put on will be our conscience our swords will be our law.$modern text$march on be brave in battle and lets go pellmell to heaven if not hand in hand to hell. to his army what more can i say remember who youre dealing witha random bunch of bums rascals runaways breton scum and peasant hangerson whom an overcrowded nation vomits out to populate every desperate suretofail enterprise. you have been sleeping soundly and they bring unrest. you own land they want to steal. those of you who are blessed with beautiful wives they want to defile them. and whos leading them but an inconsequential fellow who for the longest time lived in brittany at his mothers expense a girly man a man who never in his life felt more cold than seeps into ones boots in the snow lets send these stragglers back over the sea. lets whip these arrogant relics of francethese starving beggars tired of their lives who would have hanged themselves poor rats if it werent for this foolish enterprise theyve been dreaming aboutback to france. if were going to be conquered let men conquer us and not these french bastards whom our forefathers already beat thrashed and pummeled on their own turf and shamed them forever in the history books. should these people enjoy our lands sleep with our wives rape our daughters$drum heard far off.$listen i hear their drums. fight gentlemen of england fight brave landlords draw your bows all the way back archers spur your proud horses hard horsemen and ride in blood. startle even the sky with the sound of your lances cracking.$modern text$a messenger enters.$what does lord stanley say will he bring his army$messenger my lord he refuses to come.$richard off with his son georges head$norfolk my lord the enemy has already passed the marsh. let george stanley die after the battle.$richard a thousand hearts beat in my chest. lets advance our flags set upon our enemies and have our ancient saint of courage good saint george inspire us with the fury of fiery dragons lets go victory is with us.$they all exit.$modern text$blasts of military music trumpets and drums and flurries of soldiers fighting. norfolk and catesby enter with soldiers fighting.$catesby help my lord of norfolk help help the king performs more wonders than seem humanly possible challenging every enemy he sees. his horse is killed so hes fighting on foot risking his life to search out richmond. help dear lord or the battle will be lost$blasts of military music trumpets and drums.$richard enters.$richard a horse a horse id give my kingdom for a horse$catesby get off the field my lord. ill find you another horse.$richard peasant i have gambled my life on this one throw of the dice and im willing to take what comes. i think there are six richmonds on the field. ive killed five that looked like him anyway. a horse a horse id give my kingdom for a horse$they all exit.$modern text$blasts of military music trumpets and drums. richard and richmond enter they fight. richard is killed. the trumpet sounds to signal a retreat. richmond retreats. richmond and stanley bearing the crown return with several lords.$richmond god and your work be praised victorious friends. the day is ours. the bloody dog is dead.$stanley offering him the crown courageous richmond you fought well. here ive taken back the stolen crown from that violent lowlife so it can grace your brows. wear it enjoy it and make much of it.$richmond great god of heaven say amen to all this but tell me is young george stanley alive$stanley he is my lord and safe in leicester where if youd like we can retreat to.$richmond which gentlemen on each side have been killed$stanley john duke of norfolk walter lord ferrers sir robert brakenbury and sir william brandon.$richmond bury them in a manner appropriate to their noble births. proclaim that ill pardon the soldiers who fled if they will return and submit to my rule. as i vowed i will unite the york and lancaster families.$modern text$heaven for a long time you have frowned upon the hatred between them. smile then on this beautiful union. what traitor hears me and doesnt say amen england has long been so crazy that she was willing to hurt herself brothers blindly shed their brothers' blood fathers rashly slaughtered their own sons sons were forced to butcher their fathers. all this further divided the two families which were already so badly divided. now let richmond and elizabeth the true heirs of each royal house be joined together and let their heirs if you are willing god enrich the future with peace and plenty gracious lord blunt the swords of those traitors who mean to tear poor england apart again let those who would mar this fair lands peace with treason die before they can enjoy its wealth. civil wounds now can heal and peace can live again. so that england may live a long life like this let god say amen$they all exit.$modern text$the chorus enters.$chorus in the beautiful city of verona where our story takes place a longstanding hatred between two families erupts into new violence and citizens stain their hands with the blood of their fellow citizens. two unlucky children of these enemy families become lovers and commit suicide. their unfortunate deaths put an end to their parents' feud. for the next two hours we will watch the story of their doomed love and their parents' anger which nothing but the childrens deaths could stop. if you listen to us patiently well make up for everything weve left out in this prologue onstage.$the chorus exits.$modern text$sampson and gregory servants of the capulet family enter carrying swords and small shields.$sampson gregory i swear we cant let them humiliate us. we wont take their garbage.$gregory teasing sampson no because then wed be garbagemen.$sampson what i mean is if they make us angry well pull out our swords.$gregory maybe you should focus on pulling yourself out of trouble sampson.$sampson i hit hard when im angry.$gregory but its hard to make you angry gregory continually implies that sampson isnt as tough as hes acting. angry .$sampson one of those dogs from the montague house can make me angry.$gregory angry enough to run away. you wont stand and fight.$sampson a dog from that house will make me angry enough to take a stand. if i pass one of them on the street ill take the side closer to the wall and let him walk in the gutter.$modern text$gregory that means youre the weak one because weaklings get pushed up against the wall.$sampson youre right. thats why girls get pushed up against wallstheyre weak. so what ill do is push the montague men into the street and the montague women up against the wall.$gregory the fight is between our masters and we men who work for them.$sampson its all the same. ill be a harsh master to them. after i fight the men ill be nice to the womenill cut off their heads.$gregory cut off their heads you mean their maidenheads maidenhead = virginity. maidenheads $sampson cut off their heads take their maidenheadswhatever. take my remark in whichever sense you like.$gregory the women you rape are the ones wholl have to sense it.$sampson theyll feel me as long as i can keep an erection. everybody knows im a nice piece of flesh.$gregory its a good thing youre not a piece of fish. youre dried and shriveled they are joking about sampsons private parts. dried and shriveled like salted fish.$abram and another servant of the montagues enter.$pull out your tool now. these guys are from the house of montague.$sampson i have my naked sword out. fight ill back you up.$modern text$gregory how will you back me upby turning your back and running away$sampson dont worry about me.$gregory no really. i am worried about you$sampson lets not break the law by starting a fight. let them start something.$gregory ill frown at them as they pass by and they can react however they want.$sampson you mean however they dare. ill bite my thumb at them. thats an insult and if they let me get away with it theyll be dishonored. sampson bites his thumb biting the thumb is a gesture of disrespect. bites his thumb $abram hey are you biting your thumb at us$sampson im biting my thumb.$abram are you biting your thumb at us$sampson aside to gregory is the law on our side if i say yes$gregory aside to sampson no.$sampson to abram no sir im not biting my thumb at you but i am biting my thumb.$gregory are you trying to start a fight$abram start a fight no sir.$modern text$sampson if you want to fight im your man. my employer is as good as yours.$abram but hes not better than mine.$sampson well then.$benvolio enters.$gregory speaking so that only sampson can hear say better. here comes one of my employers relatives.$sampson to abram yes better sir.$abram you lie.$sampson pull out your swords if youre men. gregory remember how to slash.$they fight.$benvolio pulling out his sword break it up you fools. put your swords away. you dont know what youre doing.$tybalt enters.$tybalt what youve pulled out your sword to fight with these worthless servants turn around benvolio and look at the man whos going to kill you.$modern text$benvolio im only trying to keep the peace. either put away your sword or use it to help me stop this fight.$tybalt what you take out your sword and then talk about peace i hate the word peace like i hate hell all montagues and you. lets go at it coward$benvolio and tybalt fight. three or four citizens of the watch enter with clubs and spears.$citizens use your clubs and spears hit them beat them down down with the capulets down with the montagues$capulet enters in his gown together with his wife lady capulet.$capulet whats this noise give me my long sword come on$lady capulet a crutch you need a crutchwhy are you asking for a sword$montague enters with his sword drawntogether with his wife lady montague.$capulet i want my sword. old montague is here and hes waving his sword around just to make me mad.$montague capulet you villain his wife holds him back dont stop me. let me go.$lady montague youre not taking one step toward an enemy.$modern text$prince escalus enters with his escort.$prince shouting at the rioters you rebels enemies of the peace men who turn their weapons against their own neighborsthey wont listen to meyou there you men you beasts who satisfy your anger with fountains of each others' blood ill have you tortured if you dont put down your swords and listen to your angry prince. montague capulet and their followers throw down their weapons three times now riots have broken out in this city all because of a casual word from you old capulet and montague. three times the peace has been disturbed in our streets and veronas old citizens have had to take off their dress clothes and pick up rusty old spears to part you. if you ever cause a disturbance on our streets again youll pay for it with your lives. everyone else go away for now. to capulet you capulet come with me. to montague montague this afternoon come to old freetown the court where i deliver judgments and ill tell you what else i want from you. as for the rest of you ill say this once more go away or be put to death.$everyone exits except montague lady montague and benvolio.$montague who started this old fight up again speak nephew. were you here when it started$modern text$benvolio your servants were fighting your enemys servants before i got here. i drew my sword to part them. right then that hothead tybalt showed up with his sword ready. he taunted me and waved his sword around making the air hiss. as we were trading blows more and more people showed up to join the fight until the prince came and broke everyone up.$lady montague oh wheres romeo have you seen him today im glad he wasnt here for this fight.$benvolio madam i had a lot on my mind an hour before dawn this morning so i went for a walk. underneath the sycamore grove that grows on the west side of the city i saw your son taking an earlymorning walk. i headed toward him but he saw me coming and hid in the woods. i thought he must be feeling the same way i waswanting to be alone and tired of his own company. i figured he was avoiding me and i was perfectly happy to leave him alone and keep to myself.$montague hes been seen there many mornings crying tears that add drops to the morning dew and making a cloudy day cloudier with his sighs. but as soon as the sun rises in the east my sad son comes home to escape the light.$modern text$he locks himself up alone in his bedroom shuts his windows to keep out the beautiful daylight and makes himself an artificial night. this mood of his is going to bring bad news unless someone smart can fix whats bothering him.$benvolio my noble uncle do you know why he acts this way$montague i dont know and he wont tell me.$benvolio have you done everything you could to make him tell you the reason$montague ive tried and many of our friends have tried to make him talk but he keeps his thoughts to himself. he doesnt want any friend but himself and though i dont know whether hes a good friend to himself he certainly keeps his own secrets. hes like a flower bud that wont open itself up to the world because its been poisoned from within by parasites. if we could only find out why hes sad wed be as eager to help him as we were to learn the reason for his sadness.$romeo enters.$benvolio lookhere he comes. if you dont mind please step aside. hell either have to tell me whats wrong or else tell me no over and over.$montague i hope youre lucky enough to hear the true story by sticking around. to his wife come madam lets go.$montague and lady montague exit.$modern text$benvolio good morning cousin.$romeo is it that early in the day$benvolio its only just now nine o'clock.$romeo oh my time goes by slowly when youre sad. was that my father who left here in such a hurry$benvolio it was. whats making you so sad and your hours so long$romeo i dont have the thing that makes time fly.$benvolio youre in love$romeo out.$benvolio out of love$romeo i love someone. she doesnt love me.$benvolio its sad. love looks like a nice thing but its actually very rough when you experience it.$romeo whats sad is that love is supposed to be blind but it can still make you do whatever it wants. so where should we eat seeing blood oh my what fight happened here no dont tell mei know all about it. this fight has a lot to do with hatred but it has more to do with love. o brawling love o loving hate love that comes from nothing sad happiness serious foolishness beautiful things muddled together into an ugly mess love is heavy and light bright and dark hot and cold sick and healthy asleep and awakeits everything except what it is this is the love i feel though no one loves me back. are you laughing$modern text$benvolio no cousin im crying.$romeo good man why are you crying$benvolio im crying because of how sad you are.$romeo yes this is what love does. my sadness sits heavy in my chest and you want to add your own sadness to mine so theres even more. i have too much sadness already and now youre going to make me sadder by feeling sorry for you. heres what love is a smoke made out of lovers' sighs. when the smoke clears love is a fire burning in your lovers eyes. if you frustrate love you get an ocean made out of lovers' tears. what else is love its a wise form of madness. its a sweet lozenge that you choke on. goodbye cousin.$benvolio wait. ill come with you. if you leave me like this youre doing me wrong.$romeo im not myself. im not here. this isnt romeohes somewhere else.$benvolio tell me seriously who is the one you love$romeo seriously you mean i should groan and tell you$benvolio groan no. but tell me seriously who it is.$modern text$romeo you wouldnt tell a sick man he seriously has to make his willit would just make him worse. seriously cousin i love a woman.$benvolio i guessed that already when i guessed you were in love.$romeo then you were right on target. the woman i love is beautiful.$benvolio a beautiful target is the one that gets hit the fastest.$romeo well youre not on target there. she refuses to be hit by cupids cupid the roman god of love shoots arrows at humans that make them fall in love. diana is the roman goddess of virginity and hunting. cupids arrow. shes as clever as diana and shielded by the armor of chastity. she cant be touched by the weak and childish arrows of love. she wont listen to words of love or let you look at her with loving eyes or open her lap to receive gifts of gold. shes rich in beauty but shes also poor because when she dies her beauty will be destroyed with her.$benvolio so shes made a vow to be a virgin forever$romeo yes she has and by keeping celibate she wastes her beauty. if you starve yourself of sex you cant ever have children and so your beauty is lost to future generations. shes too beautiful and too wise to deserve heavens blessing by making me despair. shes sworn off love and that promise has left me alive but dead living only to talk about it now.$benvolio take my advice. dont think about her.$romeo teach me to forget to think$modern text$benvolio do it by letting your eyes wander freely. look at other beautiful girls.$romeo that will only make me think more about how beautiful she is. beautiful women like to wear black masks over their facesthose black masks only make us think about how beautiful they are underneath. a man who goes blind cant forget the precious eyesight he lost. show me a really beautiful girl. her beauty is like a note telling me where i can see someone even more beautiful. goodbye. you cant teach me to forget.$benvolio ill show you how to forget or else ill die owing you that lesson.$they exit.$modern text$capulet enters with county county = count a title of nobility. county paris followed by peter a servant.$capulet continuing a conversation but montague has sworn an oath just like i have and hes under the same penalty. i dont think it will be hard for men as old as we are to keep the peace.$paris you both have honorable reputations and its too bad youve been enemies for so long. but what do you say to my request$capulet i can only repeat what ive said before. my daughter is still very young. shes not even fourteen years old. lets wait two more summers before we start thinking shes ready to get married.$paris girls younger than she often marry and become happy mothers.$capulet girls who marry so young grow up too soon. but go ahead and charm her gentle paris make her love you. my permission is only part of her decision. if she agrees to marry you my blessing and fair words will confirm her choice. tonight im having a feast that weve celebrated for many years. ive invited many of my closest friends and id like to welcome you and add you to the guest list. at my humble house tonight you can expect to see dazzling stars that walk on the ground and light the sky from below.$modern text$youll be delighted by young women as fresh as spring flowers. look at anyone you like and choose whatever woman seems best to you. once you see a lot of girls you might not think my daughters the best anymore. come along with me.$to peter handing him a paper go little fellow walk all around verona. find the people on this list and tell them theyre welcome at my house tonight.$capulet and paris exit.$peter find the people whose names are on this list it is written that shoemakers and tailors should play with each others' tools that fisherman should play with paints and painters should play with with fishing nets. but ive been sent to find the people whose names are written on this list and i cant read ill never find them on my own. ive got to find somebody who knows how to read to help me. but here come some people right in the nick of time.$benvolio and romeo enter$benvolio to romeo come on man. you can put out one fire by starting another. a new pain will make the one you already have seem less. if you make yourself dizzy you can cure yourself by spinning back around in the opposite direction. a new grief will put the old one out of your mind. make yourself lovesick by gazing at some new girl and your old lovesickness will be cured.$modern text$romeo the plantain the plantain leaf was thought to have healing powers. plantain leaf is excellent for that.$benvolio for what romeo$romeo for when you cut your shin.$benvolio what romeo are you crazy$romeo im not crazy but im tied up tighter than a mental patient in a straitjacket. im locked up in a prison and deprived of food. im whipped and torturedto peter good evening good fellow.$peter may god give you a good evening. excuse me sir do you know how to read$romeo i can read my own fortune in my misery.$peter perhaps youve learned from life and not from books. but please tell me can you read anything you see$romeo yes if i know the language and the letters.$peter i see. well thats an honest answer peter assumes romeo means he does not know his letters. honest answer . have a nice day.$romeo stay fellow. i can read. he reads the letter signor martino and his wife and daughters count anselme and his beautiful sisters vitruvios widow signor placentio and his lovely nieces mercutio and his brother valentine my uncle capulet and his wife and daughters my fair niece rosaline and livia$modern text$signor valentio and his cousin tybalt lucio and the lively helena. thats a nice group of people. where are they supposed to come$peter up.$romeo where to supper$peter to our house.$romeo whose house$peter my masters house.$romeo indeed i should have asked you before who he was.$peter now ill tell you so you dont have to ask. my master is the great and rich capulet and if you dont belong to the house of montague please come and drink a cup of wine. have a nice day$peter exits.$benvolio the beautiful rosaline whom you love so much will be at capulets traditional feast along with every beautiful woman in verona. go there and compare her objectively to some other girls ill show you. the woman who you think is as beautiful as a swan is going to look as ugly as a crow to you.$romeo if my eyes ever lie to me like that let my tears turn into flames and burn them for being such obvious liars a woman more beautiful than the one i love the sun itself has never seen anyone as beautiful since the world began.$modern text$benvolio come on you first decided she was beautiful when no one else was around. there was no one to compare her to except herself. but let your eyes compare her to another beautiful woman who ill show you at this feast and you wont think shes the best anymore.$romeo ill go with you. not because i think youll show me anything better but so i can see the woman i love.$they exit.$modern text$lady capulet and the nurse enter.$lady capulet nurse wheres my daughter tell her to come to me.$nurse i swear to you by my virginity at age twelve i already told her to come. come on where is she what is she doing what juliet$juliet enters.$juliet what is it whos calling me$nurse your mother.$juliet madam im here. what do you want$lady capulet ill tell you whats the matternurse leave us alone for a little while. we must talk privatelynurse come back here. i just remembered you can listen to our secrets. you know how young my daughter is.$nurse yes i know her age down to the hour.$lady capulet shes not even fourteen.$nurse id bet fourteen of my own teethbut im sorry to say i only have four teethshes not fourteen. how long is it until lammastide lammastide = august . lammastide $lady capulet two weeks and a few odd days.$modern text$nurse whether its even or odd of all the days in the year on the night of lammas eve shell be fourteen. she and susangod rest her and all christian soulswere born on the same day. well susan died and is with god. she was too good for me. but like i said on the night of lammas eve she will be fourteen. yes she will. indeed i remember it well. its been eleven years since the earthquake. she stopped nursing from my breast on that very day. ill never forget it. i had put bitter wormwood on my breast as i was sitting in the sun under the wall of the dovehouse. you and your husband were in mantua. boy do i have some memory but like i said when she tasted the bitter wormwood on my nipple the pretty little babe got irritated and started to quarrel with my breast. then the dovehouse shook with the earthquake. there was no need to tell me to get out of there. that was eleven years ago. by then she could stand up all by herself. no i swear by that time she could run and waddle all around. i remember because she had cut her forehead just the day before. my husbandgod rest his soul he was a happy manpicked up the child. oh he said did you fall on your face youll fall backward fall backward = have sex. fall backward when you grow smarter. wont you jule. and i swear the poor pretty thing stopped crying and said yes. oh to watch a joke come true i bet if i live a thousand years ill never forget it. wont you jule he said. and the pretty fool stopped crying and said yes.$lady capulet enough of this. please be quiet.$modern text$nurse yes madam. but i cant help laughing to think that the baby stopped crying and said yes. i swear she had a bump on her forehead as big as a roosters testicle. it was a painful bruise and she was crying bitterly. yes said my husband did you fall on your face youll fall backward when you grow up wont you jule and she stopped crying and said yes.$juliet now you stop too nurse please.$nurse peace. im done talking. may god choose you to receive his grace. you were the prettiest baby i ever nursed. if i live to see you get married someday all my wishes will come true.$lady capulet well marriage is exactly what we have to discuss. tell me my daughter juliet what is your attitude about getting married$juliet it is an honor that i do not dream of.$nurse an honor if i werent your only nurse id say you had sucked wisdom from the breast that fed you.$lady capulet well start thinking about marriage now. here in verona there are girls younger than yougirls from noble familieswho have already become mothers. by my count i was already your mother at just about your age while you remain a virgin. well then ill say this quickly the valiant paris wants you as his bride.$nurse what a man young lady. hes as great a man as any in the whole world. hes as perfect as if he were sculpted from wax.$modern text$lady capulet summertime in verona has no flower as fine as him.$nurse no hes a fine flower truly a flower.$lady capulet to juliet what do you say can you love this gentleman tonight youll see him at our feast. study pariss face and find pleasure in his beauty. examine every line of his features and see how they work together to make him handsome. if you are confused just look into his eyes. this man is single and he lacks only a bride to make him perfect and complete. as is right fish live in the sea and its wrong for a beauty like you to hide from a handsome man like him. many people think hes handsome and whoever becomes his bride will be just as admired. you would share all that he possesses and by having him you would lose nothing.$nurse lose nothing in fact youd get bigger. men make women bigger by getting them pregnant.$lady capulet to juliet give us a quick answer. can you accept pariss love$juliet ill look at him and try to like him at least if what i see is likable. but i wont let myself fall for him any more than your permission allows.$peter enters.$modern text$peter madam the guests are here dinner is served people are calling for you people have asked for juliet and in the pantry people are cursing the nurse. everythings out of control. i must go and serve the guests. please follow straight after me.$lady capulet well follow you. juliet the count is waiting for you.$nurse go girl look for a man wholl give you happy nights at the end of happy days.$they all exit.$modern text$romeo mercutio and benvolio enter dressed as maskers along with five or six other maskers maskers are masked partygoers who perform a dance theyve invented at a party. maskers  carrying a drum and torches.$romeo what will we say is our excuse for being here or should we enter without apologizing$benvolio its out of fashion to give lengthy explanations like that. were not going to introduce our dance by having someone dress up as cupid blindfolded and carrying a toy bow to frighten the ladies like a scarecrow. nor are we going to recite a memorized speech to introduce ourselves. let them judge us however they please. well give them a dance and then hit the road.$romeo give me a torch. i dont want to dance. i feel sad so let me be the one who carries the light.$mercutio no noble romeo youve got to dance.$romeo not me believe me. youre wearing dancing shoes with nimble soles. my soul is made out of lead and its so heavy it keeps me stuck on the ground so i cant move.$mercutio youre a lover. take cupids wings and fly higher than the average man.$romeo his arrow has pierced me too deeply so i cant fly high with his cheerful feathers. because this wound keeps me down i cant leap any higher than my dull sadness. i sink under the heavy weight of love.$modern text$mercutio if you sink youre dragging love down. its not right to drag down something as tender as love.$romeo is love really tender i think its too rough too rude too rowdy and it pricks like a thorn.$mercutio if love plays rough with you play rough with love mercutio suggests that romeo cure himself of love by having sex. love . if you prick love when it pricks you youll beat love down. give me a mask to put my face in. a mask to put over my other mask. what do i care if some curious person sees my flaws let this mask with its black eyebrows blush for me. they put on masks$benvolio come on lets knock and go in. the minute we get in lets all start dancing.$romeo ill take a torch. let playful people with light hearts dance. theres an old saying that applies to me you cant lose if you dont play the game. ill just hold a torch and watch you guys. it looks like a lot of fun but ill sit this one out.$mercutio hey youre being a stick in the mud as cautious as a policemen on night patrol. if youre a stick in the mud well pull you out of the mudi mean out of love if youll excuse me for being so rudewhere youre stuck up to your ears. come on were wasting precious daylight. lets go$romeo no were notits night.$mercutio i mean were wasting the light of our torches by delaying which is like wasting the sunshine during the day. use your common sense to figure out what i mean instead of trying to be clever or trusting your five senses.$modern text$romeo we mean well by going to this masquerade ball but its not smart of us to go.$mercutio why may i ask$romeo i had a dream last night.$mercutio so did i.$romeo well what was your dream$mercutio my dream told me that dreamers often lie.$romeo they lie in bed while they dream about the truth.$mercutio oh then i see youve been with queen quean is slang for whore and mab is a stereotypical prostitutes name. queen mab.$benvolio whos queen mab$mercutio shes the fairies' midwife. shes no bigger than the stone on a city councilmans ring. she rides around in a wagon drawn by tiny little atoms and she rides over mens noses as they lie sleeping. the spokes of her wagon are made of spiders' legs. the cover of her wagon is made of grasshoppers' wings. the harnesses are made of the smallest spiderwebs. the collars are made out of moonbeams. her whip is a thread attached to a crickets bone. her wagon driver is a tiny bug in a gray coat hes not half the size of a little round worm it was believed that worms sprung from the fingers of young girls who sat about doing nothing. worm that comes from the finger of a lazy young girl.$modern text$her chariot is a hazelnut shell. it was made by a carpenter squirrel or an old grubworm theyve made wagons for the fairies as long as anyone can remember. in this royal wagon she rides every night through the brains of lovers and makes them dream about love. she rides over courtiers' knees and they dream about curtsying. she rides over lawyers' fingers and right away they dream about their fees. she rides over ladies' lips and they immediately dream of kisses. queen mab often puts blisters on their lips because their breath smells like candy which makes her mad. sometimes she rides over a courtiers lips and he dreams of making money off of someone. sometimes she tickles a priests nose with a tithepigs a tithepig was a pig given to the church to support a priest. tithepigs tail and he dreams of a large donation. sometimes she rides over a soldiers neck and he dreams of cutting the throats of foreign enemies of breaking down walls of ambushes of spanish swords and of enormous cups of liquor. and then drums beat in his ear and he wakes up. hes frightened so he says a couple of prayers and goes back to sleep. she is the same mab who tangles the hair in horses' manes at night and makes the tangles hard in the dirty hairs which bring bad luck if theyre untangled. mab is the old hag who gives false sex dreams to virgins and teaches them how to hold a lover and bear a child. shes the one$romeo enough enough mercutio be quiet. youre talking nonsense.$mercutio true. im talking about dreams which are the products of a brain thats doing nothing. dreams are nothing but silly imagination as thin as air and less predictable than the wind which sometimes blows on the frozen north and then gets angry and blows south.$modern text$benvolio the wind youre talking about is blowing us off our course. dinner is over and were going to get there too late.$romeo im worried well get there too early. i have a feeling this party tonight will be the start of something bad something that will end with my own death. but whoevers in charge of where my lifes going can steer me wherever they want. onward lover boys$benvolio beat the drum.$they march about the stage and exit.$modern text$peter and other servingmen come forward with napkins.$peter wheres potpan why isnt he helping us clear the table he should be moving and scraping plates$first servingman when only one or two men have all the good manners and even they are dirty things are bad.$peter take away the stools the sideboards and the plates. you good friend save me a piece of marzipan and if you love me have the porter let in susan grindstone and nell. antony and potpan$second servingman yes boy im ready.$peter theyre looking for you in the great chamber.$first servingman we cant be in two places at once both here and there cheers boys. be quick for a while and let the one who lives the longest take everything.$peter and the servingmen exit.$capulet enters with his cousin tybalt lady capulet juliet and other members of the house. they meet romeo benvolio mercutio and other guests and maskers$capulet welcome gentlemen. the ladies who dont have corns on their toes will dance with you. ha my ladies which of you will refuse to dance now whichever of you acts shy ill swear she has corns. does that hit close to home welcome gentlemen. there was a time when i could wear a mask over my eyes and charm a lady by whispering a story in her ear. that time is gone gone gone. you are welcome gentlemen. come on musicians play music. music plays and they dance romeo stands apart make room in the hall. make room in the hall. shake a leg girls. to servingmen more light you rascals. flip over the tables and get them out of the way. and put the fire outits getting too hot in here. to his cousin ah my man this unexpected fun feels good. no sit down sit down my good capulet cousin. you and i are too old to dance. capulet and his cousin sit down how long is it now since you and i last wore masks at a party like this$modern text$capulet's cousin i swear it must be thirty years.$capulet what man its not that long its not that long. its been since lucentios wedding. let the years fly by as fast as they like its only been twentyfive years since we wore masks.$capulet's cousin its been longer its been longer. lucentios son is older than that sir. hes thirty years old.$capulet are you really going to tell me that his son was a minor only two years ago.$romeo to a servingman who is the girl on the arm of that lucky knight over there$servingman i dont know sir.$romeo oh she shows the torches how to burn bright she stands out against the darkness like a jeweled earring hanging against the cheek of an african. her beauty is too good for this world shes too beautiful to die and be buried. she outshines the other women like a white dove in the middle of a flock of crows. when this dance is over ill see where she stands and then ill touch her hand with my rough and ugly one. did my heart ever love anyone before this moment my eyes were liars then because i never saw true beauty before tonight.$modern text$tybalt i can tell by his voice that this man is a montague. to his page get me my sword boy.what does this peasant dare to come here with his face covered by a mask to sneer at and scorn our celebration now by the honor of our family i do not consider it a crime to kill him.$capulet why whats going on here nephew why are you acting so angry$tybalt uncle this man is a montagueour enemy. hes a scoundrel whos come here out of spite to mock our party.$capulet is it young romeo$tybalt thats him that villain romeo.$capulet calm down gentle cousin. leave him alone. he carries himself like a dignified gentleman and to tell you the truth he has a reputation throughout verona as a virtuous and wellbehaved young man. i wouldnt insult him in my own house for all the wealth in this town. so calm down. just ignore him. thats what i want and if you respect my wishes youll look nice and stop frowning because thats not the way you should behave at a feast.$modern text$tybalt its the right way to act when a villain like him shows up. i wont tolerate him.$capulet you will tolerate him. what little man i say you will. what theam i the boss here or you what theyou wont tolerate him god help me youll start a riot among my guests there will be chaos it will be your fault youll be the rabblerouser$tybalt but uncle were being disrespected.$capulet go on go on. youre an insolent little boy. is that how it is really this stupidity will come back to bite you. i know what ill do. you have to contradict me do you ill teach you a lesson. to the guests well done my dear guests to tybalt youre a punk get away. keep your mouth shut or else to servingmen more light more light to tybalt you should be ashamed. ll shut you up. to the guests keep having fun my dear friends$the music plays again and the guests dance$tybalt the combination of forced patience and pure rage is making my body tremble. ill leave here now but romeos prank which seems so sweet to him now will turn bitter to him later.$tybalt exits.$modern text$romeo taking juliets hand your hand is like a holy place that my hand is unworthy to visit. if youre offended by the touch of my hand my two lips are standing here like blushing pilgrims ready to make things better with a kiss. the first fourteen lines romeo and juliet speak together form a sonnet.$juliet good pilgrim you dont give your hand enough credit. by holding my hand you show polite devotion. after all pilgrims touch the hands of statues of saints. holding one palm against another is like a kiss.$romeo dont saints and pilgrims have lips too$juliet yes pilgrimthey have lips that theyre supposed to pray with.$romeo well then saint let lips do what hands do. im praying for you to kiss me. please grant my prayer so my faith doesnt turn to despair.$juliet saints dont move even when they grant prayers.$romeo then dont move while i act out my prayer.$he kisses her.$now my sin has been taken from my lips by yours.$juliet then do my lips now have the sin they took from yours$romeo sin from my lips you encourage crime with your sweetness. give me my sin back.$they kiss again$modern text$juliet you kiss like youve studied how.$nurse madam your mother wants to talk to you.$juliet moves away$romeo who is her mother$nurse indeed young man her mother is the lady of the house. she is a good wise and virtuous lady. i nursed her daughter whom you were just talking to. let me tell you the man who marries her will become very wealthy.$romeo to himself is she a capulet oh this is a heavy price to pay my life is in the hands of my enemy.$benvolio to romeo come on lets go. right when things are the most fun is the best time to leave.$romeo yes but im afraid im in more trouble than ever.$capulet no gentlemen dont get ready to go now. we have a little dessert coming up. they whisper in his ear is that really true well then i thank you both. i thank you honest gentlemen. good night. bring more torches over here come on lets all get to bed. to his cousin ah my man i swear its getting late. im going to get some rest.$everyone except juliet and nurse begins to exit.$modern text$juliet come over here nurse. who is that gentleman$nurse he is the son and heir of old tiberio.$juliet whos the one whos going out the door right now$nurse well that one i think is young petruchio.$juliet whos the one following over there the one who wouldnt dance$nurse i dont know his name.$juliet go ask. the nurse leaves if hes married i think ill die rather than marry anyone else.$nurse returning his name is romeo. hes a montague. hes the only son of your worst enemy.$juliet to herself the only man i love is the son of the only man i hate i saw him too early without knowing who he was and i found out who he was too late love is a monster for making me fall in love with my worst enemy.$nurse whats this whats this$juliet just a rhyme i learned from somebody i danced with at the party.$somebody calls juliet from offstage.$nurse right away right away. come lets go. the strangers are all gone.$they exit.$modern text$the chorus enters.$chorus now romeos old feelings of desire are dying and a new desire is eager to take their place. romeo groaned for the beautiful rosaline and said he would die for her but compared with tender juliet rosaline doesnt seem beautiful now. now someone loves romeo and hes in love againboth of them falling for each others' good looks. but he has to make his speeches of love to a woman whos supposed to be his enemy. and shes been hooked by someone she should fear. because hes an enemy romeo has no chance to see juliet and say the things a lover normally says. and juliets just as much in love as he but she has even less opportunity to meet her lover. but love gives them power and time gives them the chance to meet sweetening the extreme danger with intense pleasure.$the chorus exits.$modern text$romeo enters alone.$romeo can i go away while my heart stays here i have to go back to where my heart is.$romeo moves away. benvolio and mercutio enter.$benvolio calling romeo my cousin romeo romeo$mercutio hes a smart boy. i bet he slipped away and went home to bed.$benvolio he ran this way and jumped over this orchard wall. call to him mercutio.$mercutio ill conjure him as if i were summoning a spirit. romeo madman passion lover show yourself in the form of a sigh. speak one rhyme and ill be satisfied. just cry out ah me just say love and dove. say just one lovely word to my good friend venus venus is the roman goddess of love. venus . just say the nickname of her blind son cupid the one who shot arrows so well in the old story.romeo doesnt hear me. he doesnt stir. he doesnt move. the silly ape is dead but i must make him appear.i summon you by rosalines bright eyes by her high forehead and her red lips by her fine feet by her straight legs by her trembling thighs and by the regions right next to her thighs. in the name of all of these things i command you to appear before us in your true form.$modern text$benvolio if he hears you youll make him angry.$mercutio what im saying cant anger him. he would be angry if i summoned a strange spirit for her to have sex withthats what would make him angry. the things im saying are fair and honest. all im doing is saying the name of the woman he loves to lure him out of the darkness.$benvolio come on. hes hidden behind these trees to keep the night company. his love is blind so it belongs in the dark.$mercutio if love is blind it cant hit the target. now hell sit under a medlar the medlar is a tree whose fruit was considered to look like a vulva or an anus. the fruits were often called openarses. popperins are belgian pears mercutio uses the name in an obscene double entrendre. medlar tree and wish his mistress were one of those fruits that look like female genitalia. oh romeo i wish she were an openarse and you a popperin pear to pop her in. good night romeo. ill go to my little trundle bed. this open field is too cold a place for me to sleep. to benvolio come on should we go$benvolio lets go. theres no point in looking for him if he doesnt want to be found.$benvolio and mercutio exit.$modern text$romeo returns.$romeo its easy for someone to joke about scars if theyve never been cut.$juliet enters on the balcony.$but wait whats that light in the window over there it is the east and juliet is the sun. rise up beautiful sun and kill the jealous moon diana is the goddess of the moon and of virginity. romeo implies that juliet is a servant of the moon as long as shes a virgin. jealous moon . the moon is already sick and pale with grief because you juliet her maid are more beautiful than she. dont be her maid because she is jealous. virginity makes her look sick and green. only fools hold on to their virginity. let it go. oh theres my lady oh it is my love. oh i wish she knew how much i love her. shes talking but shes not saying anything. so what her eyes are saying something. i will answer them. i am too bold. shes not talking to me. two of the brightest stars in the whole sky had to go away on business and theyre asking her eyes to twinkle in their places until they return. what if her eyes were in the sky and the stars were in her headthe brightness of her cheeks would outshine the stars the way the sun outshines a lamp. if her eyes were in the night sky they would shine so brightly through space that birds would start singing thinking her light was the light of day. look how she leans her hand on her cheek. oh i wish i was the glove on that hand so that i could touch that cheek.$juliet oh my$modern text$romeo to himself she speaks. oh speak again bright angel. you are as glorious as an angel tonight. you shine above me like a winged messenger from heaven who makes mortal men fall on their backs to look up at the sky watching the angel walking on the clouds and sailing on the air.$juliet not knowing romeo hears her oh romeo romeo why do you have to be romeo forget about your father and change your name. or else if you wont change your name just swear you love me and ill stop being a capulet.$romeo to himself should i listen for more or should i speak now$juliet still not knowing romeo hears her its only your name thats my enemy. youd still be yourself even if you stopped being a montague. whats a montague anyway it isnt a hand a foot an arm a face or any other part of a man. oh be some other name what does a name mean the thing we call a rose would smell just as sweet if we called it by any other name. romeo would be just as perfect even if he wasnt called romeo. romeo lose your name. trade in your namewhich really has nothing to do with youand take all of me in exchange.$romeo to juliet i trust your words. just call me your love and i will take a new name. from now on i will never be romeo again.$juliet who are you why do you hide in the darkness and listen to my private thoughts$modern text$romeo i dont know how to tell you who i am by telling you a name. i hate my name dear saint because my name is your enemy. if i had it written down i would tear up the paper.$juliet i havent heard you say a hundred words yet but i recognize the sound of your voice. arent you romeo and arent you a montague$romeo i am neither of those things if you dislike them.$juliet tell me how did you get in here and why did you come the orchard walls are high and its hard to climb over them. if any of my relatives find you here theyll kill you because of who you are.$romeo i flew over these walls with the light wings of love. stone walls cant keep love out. whatever a man in love can possibly do his love will make him try to do it. therefore your relatives are no obstacle.$juliet if they see you theyll murder you.$romeo alas one angry look from you would be worse than twenty of your relatives with swords. just look at me kindly and im invincible against their hatred.$juliet id give anything to keep them from seeing you here.$romeo the darkness will hide me from them. and if you dont love me let them find me here. id rather they killed me than have to live without your love.$modern text$juliet who told you how to get here below my bedroom$romeo love showed me the waythe same thing that made me look for you in the first place. love told me what to do and i let love borrow my eyes. im not a sailor but if you were across the farthest sea i would risk everything to gain you.$juliet you cant see my face because its dark out. otherwise youd see me blushing about the things youve heard me say tonight. i would be happy to keep up good manners and deny the things i said. but forget about good manners. do you love me i know youll say yes and ill believe you. but if you swear you love me you might turn out to be lying. they say jove jove also called jupiter was the king of the roman gods. jove laughs when lovers lie to each other. oh romeo if you really love me say it truly. or if you think its too easy and quick to win my heart ill frown and play hardtoget as long as that will make you try to win me but otherwise i wouldnt act that way for anything. in truth handsome montague i like you too much so you may think my behavior is loose. but trust me gentleman ill prove myself more faithful than girls who act coy and play hardtoget. i should have been more standoffish i confess but you overheard me talking about the love in my heart when i didnt know you were there. so excuse me and do not assume that because you made me love you so easily my love isnt serious.$romeo lady i swear by the sacred moon above the moon that paints the tops of fruit trees with silver$modern text$juliet dont swear by the moon. the moon is always changing. every month its position in the sky shifts. i dont want you to turn out to be that inconsistent too.$romeo what should i swear by$juliet dont swear at all. but if you have to swear swear by your wonderful self which is the god i worship like an idol and then ill believe you.$romeo if my hearts dear love$juliet well dont swear. although you bring me joy i cant take joy in this exchange of promises tonight. its too crazy. we havent done enough thinking. its too sudden. its too much like lightning which flashes and then disappears before you can say its lightning. my sweet good night. our love which right now is like a flower bud in the summer air may turn out to be a beautiful flower by the next time we meet. i hope you enjoy the same sweet peace and rest i feel in my heart.$romeo oh are you going to leave me so unsatisfied$juliet what satisfaction could you possibly have tonight$romeo i would be satisfied if we made each other true promises of love.$juliet i pledged my love to you before you asked me to. yet i wish i could take that promise back so i had it to give again.$romeo you would take it back why would you do that my love$modern text$juliet only to be generous and give it to you once more. but im wishing for something i already have. my generosity to you is as limitless as the sea and my love is as deep. the more love i give you the more i have. both loves are infinite.$the nurse calls from offstage.$i hear a noise inside. dear love goodbyejust a minute good nurse. sweet montague be true. stay here for a moment. ill come back.$juliet exits.$romeo oh blessed blessed night because its dark out im afraid all this is just a dream too sweet to be real.$juliet enters on her balcony.$juliet three words dear romeo and then its good night for real. if your intentions as a lover are truly honorable and you want to marry me send me word tomorrow. ill send a messenger to you and you can pass on a message telling me where and when well be married. ill lay all my fortunes at your feet and follow you my lord all over the world.$nurse offstage madam$juliet to the nurse ill be right there to romeo but if you dont have honorable intentions i beg you$nurse offstage madam$modern text$juliet alright im comingi beg you to stop trying for me and leave me to my sadness. tomorrow ill send the messenger.$romeo my soul depends on it$juliet a thousand times good night.$juliet exits.$romeo leaving you is a thousand times worse than being near you. a lover goes toward his beloved as enthusiastically as a schoolboy leaving his books but when he leaves his girlfriend he feels as miserable as the schoolboy on his way to school.$romeo starts to leave. juliet returns on her balcony.$juliet hist romeo hist oh i wish i could make a falconers juliet is trying to call to romeo as if he was a falcon. falconers call so i could bring my little falcon back again. im trapped in my familys house so i must be quiet. otherwise i would rip open the cave where echo echo a mythical woman who was scorned by narcissus withered with sadness repeating his name and after her death her voice still reverberated in caves which is why we have the word echo. echo sleeps. i would make her repeat his name until her voice grew more hoarse than mine by repeating my romeo$romeo my soul is calling out my name. the sound of lovers calling each others names through the night is silversweet. its the sweetest sound a lover ever hears.$modern text$juliet romeo$romeo my baby hawk$juliet what time tomorrow should i send a messenger to you$romeo by nine o'clock.$juliet i wont fail. from now until then seems like twenty years. i have forgotten why i called you back.$romeo let me stand here until you remember your reason.$juliet ill forget it and youll have to stand there forever. ill only remember how much i love your company.$romeo ill keep standing here even if you keep forgetting. ill forget that i have any home besides this spot right here.$juliet its almost morning. i want to make you go but id only let you go as far as a spoiled child lets his pet bird go. he lets the bird hop a little from his hand and then yanks him back by a string.$romeo i wish i was your bird.$juliet my sweet so do i. but i would kill you by petting you too much. good night good night. parting is such sweet sorrow that ill say good night until tonight becomes tomorrow.$juliet exits.$modern text$romeo i hope you sleep peacefully. i wish i were sleep and peace so i could spend the night with you. now ill go see my priest to ask for his help and tell him about my good luck.$he exits.$modern text$friar lawrence enters by himself carrying a basket.$friar lawrence the smiling morning is replacing the frowning night. darkness is stumbling out of the suns path like a drunk man. now before the sun comes up and burns away the dew i have to fill this basket of mine with poisonous weeds and medicinal flowers. the earth is natures mother and also natures tomb. plants are born out of the earth and they are buried in the earth when they die. from the earths womb many different sorts of plants and animals come forth and the earth provides her children with many excellent forms of nourishment. everything nature creates has some special property and each one is different. herbs plants and stones possess great power. there is nothing on earth that is so evil that it does not provide the earth with some special quality. and there is nothing that does not turn bad if its put to the wrong use and abused. virtue turns to vice if its misused. vice sometimes becomes virtue through the right activity.$romeo enters.$inside the little rind of this weak flower there is both poison and powerful medicine. if you smell it you feel good all over your body. but if you taste it you die. there are two opposite elements in everything in men as well as in herbsgood and evil.$modern text$when evil is dominant death soon kills the body like cancer.$romeo good morning father.$friar lawrence god bless you. who greets me so early in the morning young man somethings wrong if youre getting out of bed this early. every old man has worries and worried men never get any sleep but young men shouldnt have a care in the world. they should get to bed early and get plenty of sleep. therefore the fact that youre awake this early tells me youve been upset with some anxiety. if thats not the case then this must be the answer you romeo have not been to bed tonight.$romeo your last guess is right. i enjoyed a sweeter rest than sleep.$friar lawrence may god forgive you if youve sinnedwere you with rosaline$romeo with rosaline father no i have forgotten that girl and all the sadness she brought me.$friar lawrence thats good my boy. but where have you been$romeo ill tell you before you have to ask me again. i have been feasting with my enemy. suddenly someone wounded me with love and was wounded with love by me. you have the sacred power to cure both of us. i carry no hatred holy man because my request will benefit my enemy.$modern text$friar lawrence speak plainly make your meaning clear my son. a jumbled confession can only receive a jumbled absolution.$romeo i love rich capulets daughter. i love her and she loves me. were bound to each other in every possible way except we need you to marry us. ill tell you more later about when and where we met how we fell in love and how we exchanged promises but now im begging you please agree to marry us today.$friar lawrence holy saint francis this is a drastic change have you given up so quickly on rosaline whom you loved so much then young men love with their eyes not with their hearts. jesus and mary how many tears did you cry for rosaline how many salty teardrops did you waste salting a love you never tasted the sun hasnt yet melted away the fog you made with all your sighs. the groans you used to make are still ringing in my old ears. theres still a stain on your cheek from an old tear that hasnt been washed off yet. if you were ever yourself and this sadness was yours you and your sadness were all for rosaline. and now youve changed then repeat this after me you cant expect women to be faithful when men are so unreliable.$romeo you scolded me often for loving rosaline.$friar lawrence i scolded you for obsessing about her not for loving her my student.$romeo and you told me to bury my love.$modern text$friar lawrence i didnt tell you to get rid of one love and replace her with another.$romeo please i beg you dont scold me. the girl i love now returns my love. the other girl did not love me.$friar lawrence oh she knew very well that you were acting like you were in love without really knowing what love means. but come on inconsistent young man come with me. ill help you with your secret wedding. this marriage may be lucky enough to turn the hatred between your families into pure love.$romeo lets get out of here. im in a rush.$friar lawrence go wisely and slowly. those who rush stumble and fall.$they exit.$modern text$benvolio and mercutio enter.$mercutio where the devil can romeo be didnt he come home last night$benvolio not to his fathers house. i asked a servant.$mercutio that fairskinned hardhearted hussy rosaline is going to torment him until he goes insane.$benvolio tybalt old capulets nephew has sent a letter to romeos fathers house.$mercutio i bet its a challenge.$benvolio romeo will answer the challenge.$mercutio any man who knows how to write can answer a letter.$benvolio no romeo will respond to the letters writer telling him whether he accepts the challenge.$mercutio oh poor romeo hes already dead. hes been stabbed by a white girls black eye. hes been cut through the ear with a love song. the center of his heart has been split by blind cupids arrow. is he man enough at this point to face off with tybalt$benvolio why whats tybalts story$mercutio hes tougher than the prince of cats the prince of cats is a figure from medieval lore whose first name was also tybalt. prince of cats . he does everything by the book. he fights like you sing at a recital paying attention to time distance and proportion. he takes the proper breaks one two and the third in your heart. hes the butcher who can hit any silk button. a master of duels. hes a gentleman from the finest school of fencing. he knows how to turn any argument into a swordfight. he knows mercutio lists italian terms for fencing moves. he knows passadothe forward thrustthe punto reversothe backhand thrustand the haithe thrust that goes straight through.$modern text$benvolio he knows what$mercutio i hate these crazy affected guys who use foreign phrases and newfangled expressions. i hate their strange manners and their weird accents i hate it when they say by jesus this is a very good blade a very brave man a very good whore. isnt this a sad thing my good man why should we put up with these foreign buzzards these fashionmongers these guys who say pardon me these guys who care so much about manners that they cant kick back on a bench without whining oh my aching bones$romeo enters.$benvolio here comes romeo here comes romeo$mercutio he looks skinny like a dried herring without its eggs and he hasnt got his girl. o flesh flesh youve turned pale and weak like a fish. now hes ready for petrarchs mercutio teases romeo by alluding to the poet petrarch and six mythical and historical women who inspired love poetry. petrarchs poetry. compared to romeos girl laura was a kitchen slave. surely she has a better love to make rhymes for her. dido was shabbily dressed. cleopatra was a gypsy girl. helen and hero were sluts and harlots. thisbe might have had a blue eye or two but that doesnt matter. signor romeo bonjour. theres a french greeting that matches your drooping frenchstyle pants. you faked us out pretty good last night.$modern text$romeo good morning to you both. what do you mean i faked you out$mercutio you gave us the slip sir the slip. cant you understand what im saying$romeo excuse me good mercutio. i had very important business to take care of. it was so important that i had to forget about courtesy and good manners.$mercutio in other words important business made you flex your buttocks mercutio implies romeos business was sexual. flex your buttocks .$romeo you mean do a curtsy$mercutio youve hit the target this is sexual double entedre. target  sir.$romeo thats a very polite and courteous explanation.$mercutio yes i am the pink flowerthe master of courtesy and manners.$romeo the pink flower pink flower suggests the female genitalia. pink flower .$mercutio right.$modern text$romeo well then my pump romeo plays along pump= shoe and penis. pump is well decorated with flowers.$mercutio alright my witty friend this joke has worn out your pump. its thin skin is all worn out. the joke is all you have left.$romeo this is a bad joke. its all silliness.$mercutio come break this up benvolio. im losing this duel of wits.$romeo keep going keep going or ill declare myself the winner.$mercutio now if our jokes go on a wildgoose chase im finished. you have more wild goose in one of your jokes than i have in five of mine. was i even close to you in the chase for the goose$romeo you were never with me for anything if you werent there for the goose. romeo implies that mercutio is only good for jokes.$mercutio ill bite you on the ear for that joke.$romeo no good goose dont bite me.$mercutio your joke is a very bitter apple. your humor is a spicy sauce.$romeo then isnt it just the right dish for a sweet goose$mercutio oh thats a joke made out of leather that spreads itself thin from the width of an inch to as fat as a yard.$modern text$romeo i stretch my joke for that word fat. if you add that word to the word goose it shows that you are a fat goose.$mercutio why isnt all this joking better than groaning about love now youre sociable. now youre romeo. now you are what youve learned to be and what you are naturally. this love of yours was like a blithering idiot who runs up and down looking for a hole to hide his toy toy = a double entendre for penis toy in.$benvolio stop there stop there.$mercutio you want me to stop my tale tale = a double entendre for penis tale before im done.$benvolio otherwise your tale would have gotten too long.$mercutio oh youre wrong. i would have made it short. i had come to the deepest part of my tale and i planned to say nothing more on the topic.$the nurse enters with her servant peter.$romeo heres something good.$benvolio a sail a sail benvolio makes the cry of a sailor who spots another ship on the horizon because the nurse is fat and silylooking. a sail a sail$mercutio theres twoa man and a woman.$nurse peter$modern text$peter im at your service.$nurse give me my fan peter.$mercutio good peter give her her fan to hide her face. her fan is prettier than her face.$nurse good morning gentlemen.$mercutio good afternoon fair lady.$nurse is it now afternoon$mercutio its not earlier than that i tell you. the lusty hand again mercutios language is full of offensive sexual innuendo. lusty hand of the clock is now pricking noon.$nurse get out of here what kind of man are you$mercutio im a man my lady that god has made for himself to ruin.$nurse i swear you speak the truth. for himself to ruin he says. gentlemen can any of you tell me where i can find young romeo$romeo i can tell you but young romeo will be older when you find him than he was when you started looking for him. i am the youngest man by that name because there is no one younger or worse.$nurse you speak well.$modern text$mercutio is the worst well very well taken i believe very wise.$nurse to romeo if youre the romeo im looking for sir i would like to have a confidence the nurse means conference not confidence. this is a joke called a malapropism where the right word is replaced by a similarsounding word with a completely different meaning. confidence with you.$benvolio she will indite bevolio makes fun of the nurse by saying indite instead of invite. indite him to some dinner party.$mercutio a pimp a pimp a pimp ive found it out.$romeo what have you found out$mercutio shes not a prostitute unless shes using her ugliness to hide her promiscuity.$he walks by them and sings old rabbit meat is good to eat if you cant get anything else. but if its so old that it goes bad before you eat it then it was a waste of money. speaking$romeo are you going to your fathers for lunch lets go there.$romeo ill follow after you.$modern text$mercutio goodbye old lady. goodbye lady lady lady. mercutio mockingly sings a romantic song to the nurse. goodbye old lady. goodbye lady lady lady.$benvolio and mercutio exit.$nurse please tell me sir who was that foulmouthed punk who was so full of crude jokes$romeo nurse hes a man who likes to hear the sound of his own voice. he says more in one minute than he does in a whole month.$nurse if he says anything against me ill humble him even if he were stronger than he isand twenty punks like him. if i cant do it myself ill find someone who can. that dirty rat im not one of his sluts. im not one of his punk friends who carries a knife. to peter and you just stand there letting every jerk make fun of me for kicks.$peter i didnt see anybody use you for kicks. if i had seen something like that i would have quickly pulled out my weapon. believe me ill draw my sword as quick as any other man if i see a fight starting and the law is on my side.$nurse now i swear im so angry that im shaking all over. that rotten scoundrel to romeo now please may i have a word with you sir my young mistress asked me to find you. what she asked me to say ill keep to myself. but let me tell you this first. if you lead her into a fools paradise as the saying goes it would be an outrageous crime because the girl is so young. and if you try to trick her it would be an evil thing to do to any woman and very poor behavior.$modern text$romeo nurse give my regards to to your lady. i swear to you$nurse you have a good heart and believe me ill tell her that. lord lord shell be a happy woman.$romeo what are you going to tell her nurse youre not paying attention to me.$nurse sir ill tell her that you protest here the nurse makes another malapropism saying protest when she means propose.. protest to her which i think is the gentlemanly thing to do..$romeo tell her to devise a plan to get out of her house and come to confession at the abbey this afternoon. at friar lawrences cell she can make confession and be married. giving her coins here is a reward for your efforts.$nurse no really i wont take a penny.$romeo go on i insist you take it.$nurse taking the money this afternoon sir shell be there.$romeo wait good nurse. within an hour one of my men will come to you behind the abbey wall and give you a rope ladder. ill use the rope ladder to climb over the walls at night. then ill meet juliet joyfully and in secret. goodbye. be honest and helpful and ill repay you for your efforts. goodbye. sing my praises to your mistress.$modern text$nurse may god in heaven bless you. now please listen sir.$romeo what do you have to say my dear nurse$nurse can your man keep a secret havent you ever heard the saying two can conspire to put one away$romeo i assure you my man is as true as steel.$nurse well sir my mistress is the sweetest lady. lord lord when she was a little babyoh there is one nobleman in the city a guy named paris who would be happy to claim her as his own. juliet would rather look at a toad than at him. i make her angry sometimes by saying that paris is more handsome than you are. but when i say so i swear she turns white as a sheet. dont rosemary rosemary was a token of remembrance between lovers and for the dead. rosemary and romeo begin with the same letter$romeo yes nurse what about that they both begin with the letter r.$nurse ah you jokesterthats the dogs name. r is for theno i know it begins with another letter. she says the most beautiful things about you and rosemary. it would be good for you to hear the things she says.$romeo give my compliments to your lady.$nurse yes a thousand times. peter$peter im ready.$nurse giving peter her fan go ahead. go quickly.$they all exit.$modern text$juliet enters.$juliet i sent the nurse at nine o'clock. maybe she cant find him. that cant be. oh shes slow loves messengers should be thoughts which fly ten times faster than sunbeams. they should be strong enough to push shadows over the dark hills. thats the way doves carry venus so fast and thats why cupid has wings that let him fly as fast as the wind. now its noon. thats three hours since nine o'clock but she hasnt come back. if she was young and passionate shed move as fast as a ball. my words would bounce her to my sweet love and his words would bounce her back to me. but a lot of old people act like theyre already deadsluggish slow fat and colorless like lead.$the nurse and peter enter.$oh my god here she comes oh sweet nurse what news do you bring have you spoken to him send your man away.$nurse peter wait for me at the gate.$peter exits.$juliet now good sweet nurseoh lord why do you look so sad even if the news is sad tell me with a smile on your face. if the news is good youre ruining the sweet news by playing a trick with a sour face like that.$modern text$nurse i am tired. leave me alone for a minute. oh my my bones ache so much. ive been running all over the place.$juliet i wish you had my bones and i had your news. come on now i beg you speak good nurse speak.$nurse sweet jesus youre in such a hurry cant you wait for a moment dont you see that im out of breath$juliet how can you be out of breath when you have enough breath to tell me that youre out of breath the excuse you make to delay the news is longer than the news itself. is the news good or bad answer that question. tell me if its good or bad and ill wait for the details. tell me so i can be satisfied. is it good or bad$nurse well you have made a foolish choice. you dont know how to pick a man. romeo no not him though his face is more handsome than any mans and his legs are prettier and as for his hands and feet and body theyre not much to speak of and yet theyre beyond compare. hes not the most polite man in the world but believe me hes gentle as a lamb. well do what you want. be good. have you had lunch yet$juliet no i havent had lunch. everything you told me i already knew. what does he say about our marriage what about that$nurse lord what a headache ive got my head is pounding. it feels like itll break into twenty pieces. my back aches toojuliet rubs her back ooh on the other sideah my poor aching back curse your heart for sending me running all over town. i could get sick and die.$modern text$juliet believe me im sorry youre in pain. sweet sweet sweet nurse tell me what did my love romeo say$nurse your love says like an honorable gentleman who is courteous kind handsome and i believe virtuous where is your mother$juliet where is my mother why shes inside. where else would she be your answer is so strange your love says like an honorable gentleman 'where is your mother'$nurse oh holy mary mother of god are you this impatient come on youre being ridiculous is this the cure for my aching bones from now on take care of your messages yourself.$juliet youre making such a fuss. come on what did romeo say$nurse do you have permission to go out and take confession today$juliet i do.$nurse then hurry up and rush over to friar lawrences cell. theres a husband there whos waiting to make you his wife. now i see the blood rushing to your cheeks. you blush bright red as soon as you hear any news. go to the church. i must go by a different path to get a rope ladder. your love will use it to climb up to your window while its dark. i do the drudge work for your pleasure. but soon youll be doing a wifes work all night long. go. ill go to lunch. you go to friar lawrences cell.$modern text$juliet wish me luck. thank you dear nurse.$they exit.$modern text$friar lawrence and romeo enter.$friar lawrence may the heavens be happy with this holy act of marriage so nothing unfortunate happens later to make us regret it.$romeo amen amen. but whatever misfortunes occur they cant ruin the joy i feel with one look at her. all you have to do is join our hands with holy words then lovedestroying death can do whatever it pleases. its enough for me if i can call her mine.$friar lawrence these sudden joys have sudden endings. they burn up in victory like fire and gunpowder. when they meet as in a kiss they explode. too much honey is delicious but it makes you sick to your stomach. therefore love each other in moderation. that is the key to longlasting love. too fast is as bad as too slow.$juliet enters in a rush and embraces romeo.$here comes the lady. oha footstep as light as hers will never endure the rocky road of life. lovers are so light they can walk on a spiderweb floating on a summer breeze and yet not fall. thats how flimsy and unreal pleasure is.$juliet good evening my spiritual confessor.$friar lawrence romeo will thank you my girl for both of us.$modern text$juliet ill give him equal thanks so were even.$romeo ah juliet if youre as happy as i am and youre better with words tell me about the happiness you imagine well have in our marriage.$juliet i can imagine more than i can sayi have more on my mind than words. anyone who can count how much he has is poor. my true love has made me so rich that i cant count even half of my wealth.$friar lawrence come come with me and well do the job quickly. because if you dont mind im not leaving you two alone until youre united in marriage.$they exit.$modern text$mercutio his page and benvolio enter with other men.$benvolio im begging you good mercutio lets call it a day. its hot outside and the capulets are wandering around. if we bump into them well certainly get into a fight. when its hot outside people become angry and hotblooded.$mercutio youre like one of those guys who walks into a bar slams his sword on the table and then says i pray i never have to use you. by the time he orders his second drink he pulls his sword on the bartender for no reason at all.$benvolio am i really like one of those guys$mercutio come on you can be as angry as any guy in italy when youre in the mood. when someone does the smallest thing to make you angry you get angry. and when youre in the mood to get angry you find something to get angry about.$benvolio and what about that$mercutio if there were two men like you pretty soon thered be none because the two of you would kill each other. you would fight with a man if he had one more whisker or one less whisker in his beard than you have in your beard. youll fight with a man whos cracking nuts just because you have hazelnutcolored eyes. only you would look for a fight like that. your head is as full of fights as an egg is full of yolk but your head has been beaten like scrambled eggs from so much fighting. you started a fight with a man who coughed in the street because he woke up a dog that was sleeping in the sun. didnt you argue it out with your tailor for wearing one of his new suits before the right season and with another for tying the new shoes he made with old laces and yet youre the one who wants to teach me about restraint$modern text$benvolio if i were in the habit of fighting the way you are my life insurance rates would be sky high.$mercutio your life insurance thats foolish.$tybalt petruchio and capulets enter.$benvolio oh great here come the capulets.$mercutio well well i dont care.$tybalt to petruccio and others follow me closely ill talk to them. to the montagues good afternoon gentlemen. id like to have a word with one of you.$mercutio you just want one word with one of us put it together with something else. make it a word and a blow.$tybalt youll find me ready enough to do that sir if you give me a reason.$mercutio cant you find a reason without my giving you one$tybalt mercutio you hang out with romeo.$modern text$mercutio hang out who do you think we are musicians in a band if we look like musicians to you you can expect to hear nothing but noise. touching the blade of his sword this is my fiddlestick. ill use it to make you dance. goddammithang out$benvolio were talking here in a public place. either go someplace private or talk it over rationally or else just go away. out here everybody can see us.$mercutio mens eyes were made to see things so let them watch. i wont move to please anybody.$romeo enters.$tybalt well may peace be with you. here comes my man the man im looking for.$mercutio hes not your man. alright walk out into a field and hell chase you. in that sense you can call him your man.$tybalt romeo theres only one thing i can call you. youre a villain.$romeo tybalt i have a reason to love you that lets me put aside the rage i should feel and excuse that insult. i am no villain. so goodbye. i can tell that you dont know who i am.$tybalt boy your words cant excuse the harm youve done to me. so now turn and draw your sword.$modern text$romeo i disagree. ive never done you harm. i love you more than you can understand until you know the reason why i love you. and so good capuletwhich is a name i love like my own nameyou should be satisfied with what i say.$mercutio this calm submission is dishonorable and vile. the thrust of a sword will end this surrender. draws his swordtybalt you ratcatcher will you go fight me$tybalt what do you want from me$mercutio good king of cats i want to take one of your nine lives. ill take one and depending on how you treat me after that i might beat the other eight out of you too. will you pull your sword out of its sheath hurry up or ill smack you on the ears with my sword before you have yours drawn.$tybalt ill fight you. he draws his sword$romeo noble mercutio put your sword away.$mercutio to tybalt come on sir perform your forward thrust your passado.$mercutio and tybalt fight$drawing his sword draw your sword benvolio. lets beat down their weapons. gentlemen stop this disgraceful fight. tybalt mercutio the prince has banned fighting in the streets of verona. stop tybalt. stop good mercutio.$modern text$romeo tries to break up the fight. tybalt reaches under romeos arm and stabs mercutio.$petruchio lets get away tybalt.$tybalt petruchio and the other capulets exit.$mercutio ive been hurt. may a plague curse both your families. im finished. did he get away clean$benvolio what are you hurt$mercutio yes yes. its a scratch just a scratch. but its enough. where is my page go boy. get me a doctor.$mercutio's page exits.$romeo have courage man. the wound cant be that bad.$mercutio no its not as deep as a well or as wide as a church door but its enough. itll do the job. ask for me tomorrow and youll find me in a grave. im done for in this world i believe. may a plague strike both your houses. goddammit i cant believe that dog that rat that mouse that cat could scratch me to death that braggart punk villain who fights like he learned swordsmanship from a manual why the hell did you come in between us he struck me from under your arm.$romeo i thought it was the right thing to do.$modern text$mercutio take me inside some house benvolio or ill pass out. may a plague strike both your families theyve turned me into food for worms. im done for. curse your families$mercutio and benvolio exit.$romeo this gentleman mercutio a close relative of the prince and my dear friend was killed while defending me from tybalts slandertybalt who had been my cousin for a whole hour oh sweet juliet your beauty has made me weak like a woman and you have softened my bravery which before was as hard as steel.$benvolio enters.$benvolio oh romeo romeo brave mercutio is dead his brave spirit has floated up to heaven but it was too early for him to leave life on earth.$romeo the future will be affected by todays terrible events. today is the start of a terror that will end in the days ahead.$tybalt enters.$benvolio here comes the furious tybalt back again.$romeo hes alive and victorious and mercutios dead enough with mercy and consideration. its time for rage to guide my actions. now tybalt you can call me villain the way you did before. mercutios soul is floating right above our heads. hes waiting for you to keep him company on the way up to heaven. either you or i or both of us have to go with him.$modern text$tybalt wretched boy you hung out with him here and youre going to go to heaven with him.$romeo this fight will decide who dies.$they fight. tybalt falls and dies$benvolio romeo get out of here. the citizens are around and tybalt is dead. dont stand there shocked. the prince will give you the death penalty if you get caught. so get out of here$romeo oh i have awful luck.$benvolio why are you waiting$romeo exits.$the citizens of the watch enter.$citizen of the watch the man who killed mercutio which way did he go tybalt that murderer which way did he run$benvolio tybalt is lying over there.$citizen of the watch to tybalt get up sir and come with me. i command you by the authority of the prince to obey me.$the prince enters with montague capulet lady montague lady capulet and others.$modern text$prince where are the evil men who started this fight$benvolio oh noble prince i can tell you everything about the unfortunate circumstances of this deadly fight. over there tybalt is lying dead. he killed your relative brave mercutio and then young romeo killed him.$lady capulet tybalt was my nephew he was my brothers son oh prince oh nephew oh husband oh my nephew is dead oh prince as you are a man of honor take revenge for this murder by killing someone from the montague family. oh cousin cousin$prince benvolio who started this fight$benvolio tybalt started the fight before he was killed by romeo. romeo spoke to tybalt politely and told him how silly this argument was. he mentioned that you would not approve of the fight. he said all of this gently and calmly kneeling down out of respect. but he could not make peace with tybalt who was in an angry mood and wouldnt listen to talk about peace. tybalt and mercutio began to fight each other fiercely lunging at one another and dodging each others blows. romeo cried out stop my friends. break it up. then he jumped in between them and forced them to put their swords down. but tybalt reached under romeos arm and thrust his sword into brave mercutio. then tybalt fled the scene.$modern text$but pretty soon he came back to meet romeo who was overcome with the desire for revenge. as quick as lightning they started fighting. before i could break up the fight tybalt was killed. romeo ran away when tybalt fell dead. im telling you the truth i swear on my life.$lady capulet benvolio is part of the montague family. his loyalties to the montagues make him tell lies. hes not telling the truth. there were twenty montagues fighting in this awful riot and together those twenty could only kill one man. i demand justice. you prince are the man who can give me justice. romeo killed tybalt. romeo must die.$prince romeo killed tybalt. tybalt killed mercutio. who should now pay the price for mercutios life$montague not romeo prince. he was mercutios friend. his crime did justices job by taking tybalts life.$prince and for that crime romeo is hereby exiled from verona. im involved in your rivalry. mercutio was my relative and he lies dead because of your bloody feud. ill punish you so harshly that youll regret causing me this loss. i wont listen to your pleas or excuses. you cant get out of trouble by praying or crying so dont bother. tell romeo to leave the city immediately or else if he is found he will be killed. take away this body and do what i say. showing mercy by pardoning killers only causes more murders.$they exit.$modern text$juliet enters alone.$i wish the sun would hurry up and set and night would come immediately. when the night comes and everyone goes to sleep romeo will leap into my arms and no one will know. beauty makes it possible for lovers to see how to make love in the dark. or else love is blind and its best time is the night. i wish night would come like a widow dressed in black so i can learn how to submit to my husband and lose my virginity. let the blood rushing to my cheeks be calmed. in the darkness let me a shy virgin learn the strange act of sex so that it seems innocent modest and true. come night. come romeo. youre like a day that comes during the night. youre whiter than snow on the black wings of a raven. come gentle night. come loving dark night. give me my romeo. and when i die turn him into stars and form a constellation in his image. his face will make the heavens so beautiful that the world will fall in love with the night and forget about the garish sun. oh i have bought loves mansion but i havent moved in yet.i belong to romeo now but he hasnt taken possession of me yet. this day is so boring that i feel like a child on the night before a holiday waiting to put on my fancy new clothes.$modern text$the nurse enters with the rope ladder in her pouch.$oh here comes my nurse and she brings news. every voice that mentions romeos name sounds beautiful. now nurse whats the news is that the rope ladder romeo told you to pick up$nurse yes yes this is the rope ladder.$juliet oh my whats the news why do you look so upset$nurse oh its a sad day hes dead. hes dead. hes dead were ruined lady were ruined what an awful day hes gone. hes been killed. hes dead$juliet can god be so jealous and hateful$nurse romeo is hateful even though god isnt. oh romeo romeo who ever would have thought it would be romeo$juliet what kind of devil are you to torture me like this this is as bad as the tortures of hell. has romeo killed himself just say yes and i will turn more poisonous than the snake with the evil eye. i will no longer be myself if you tell me romeo killed himself. if hes been killed say yes. if not say no. these short words will determine my joy or my pain.$nurse i saw the wound. i saw it with my own eyes. god bless that wound here on his manly chest. a pitiful corpse a bloody pitiful corpse. pale as ashes and drenched in blood. all the dried blood was so gory. i fainted when i saw it.$modern text$juliet oh my heart is breaking. oh my bankrupt heart is breaking. ill send my eyes to prison and theyll never be free to look at anything again. ill give my vile body back to the earth. ill never move again. my body and romeos will lie together in one sad coffin.$nurse oh tybalt tybalt he was the best friend i had. oh polite tybalt he was an honorable gentleman. i wish i had not lived long enough to see him die.$juliet what disaster is this has romeo been killed and is tybalt dead too tybalt was my dearest cousin. romeo was even dearer to me as my husband. let the trumpets play the song of doom because who can be alive if those two are gone$nurse tybalt is dead and romeo has been banished. romeo killed tybalt and his punishment was banishment.$juliet oh god did romeos hand shed tybalts blood$nurse it did it did. curse the day this happened but it did.$juliet oh hes like a snake disguised as a flower. did a dragon ever hide in such a beautiful cave hes a beautiful tyrant and a fiendish angel hes a raven with the feathers of the dove. hes a lamb who hunts like a wolf i hate him yet he seemed the most wonderful man. hes turned out to be the exact opposite of what he seemed. hes a saint who should be damned. hes a villain who seemed honorable. oh nature what were you doing in hell why did you put the soul of a criminal in the perfect body of a man was there ever such an evil book with such a beautiful cover oh i cant believe the deepest evil lurked inside something so beautiful$modern text$nurse there is no trust no faith no honesty in men. all of them lie. all of them cheat. theyre all wicked. ah wheres my servantgive me some brandy.these griefs these pains these sorrows make me old. shame on romeo$juliet i hope sores cover your tongue for a wish like that he was not born to be shameful. shame does not belong with romeo. he deserves only honor complete honor. oh i was such a beast to be angry at him.$nurse are you going to say good things about the man who killed your cousin$juliet am i supposed to say bad things about my own husband ah my poor husband who will sing your praises when i your wife of three hours have been saying awful things about you but why you villain did you kill my cousin probably because my cousin the villain would have killed my husband. im not going to cry any tears. i would cry with joy that romeo is alive but i should cry tears of grief because tybalt is dead. my husband whom tybalt wanted to kill is alive. tybalt who wanted to kill my husband is dead. all this is comforting news. why then should i cry there is news worse than the news that tybalt is dead news that makes me want to die. i would be glad to forget about it but it weighs on my memory like sins linger in guilty minds. tybalt is dead and romeo has been banished.$modern text$that banishment is worse than the murder of ten thousand tybalts. tybalts death would be bad enough if that was all. maybe pain likes to have company and cant come without bringing more pain. it would have been better if after she said tybalts dead she told me my mother or my father or both were gone. that would have made me make the normal cries of sadness. but to say that tybalts dead and then say romeo has been banished. to say that is like saying that my father my mother tybalt romeo and juliet have all been killed theyre all dead. romeo has been banished. that news brings infinite death. no words can express the pain. where are my father and my mother nurse$nurse they are crying and moaning over tybalts corpse. are you going to join them ill bring you there.$juliet are they washing out his wounds with their tears ill cry my tears for romeos banishment when their tears are dry. pick up this rope ladder. this poor rope ladder its useless now just like me because romeo has been exiled. he made this rope ladder to be a highway to my bed but i am a virgin and i will die a virgin and a widow. lets go rope ladder. nurse im going to lie in my wedding bed. and death not romeo can take my virginity$nurse go to your bedroom. ill find romeo to comfort you. i know where he is. listen your romeo will be here tonight. ill go to him. hes hiding out in friar lawrences cell.$modern text$juliet giving her a ring oh find him give this ring to my true knight and tell him to come here to say his last goodbye.$they exit.$modern text$friar lawrence enters.$friar lawrence romeo come out. come out you frightened man. trouble likes you and youre married to disaster.$romeo enters.$romeo father whats the news what punishment did the prince announce what suffering lies in store for me that i dont know about yet$friar lawrence you know too much about suffering. i have news for you about the princes punishment.$romeo is the princes punishment any less awful than doomsday$friar lawrence he made a gentler decision. you wont die but youll be banished from the city.$romeo ha banishment be merciful and say death. exile is much worse than death. dont say banishment.$friar lawrence from now on you are banished from verona. you should be able to endure this because the world is broad and wide.$romeo there is no world for me outside the walls of verona except purgatory torture and hell itself. so to be banished from verona is like being banished from the world and being banished from the world is death.$modern text$banishment is death by the wrong name. calling death banishment is like cutting off my head with a golden ax and smiling while im being murdered.$friar lawrence oh deadly sin oh rude and unthankful boy you committed a crime that is punishable by death but our kind prince took sympathy on you and ignored the law when he substituted banishment for death. this is kind mercy and you dont realize it.$romeo its torture not mercy. heaven is here because juliet lives here. every cat and dog and little mouse every unworthy animal that lives here can see her but romeo cant. flies are healthier and more honorable and better suited for romance than romeo. they can take hold of juliets wonderful white hand and they can kiss her sweet lips. even while she remains a pure virgin she blushes when her lips touch each other because she thinks its a sin. but romeo cant kiss her or hold her hand because hes been banished. flies can kiss her but i must flee the city. flies are like free men but i have been banished. and yet you say that exile is not death did you have no poison no sharp knife no weapon you could use to kill me quickly nothing so disgraceful except banishment oh friar damned souls use the word banishment to describe hell. they howl about banishment. if youre a member of a divine spiritual order of men who forgive sins and you say youre my friend how do you have the heart to mangle me with the word banishment$friar lawrence you foolish madman listen to me for a moment.$modern text$romeo oh youre just going to talk about banishment again.$friar lawrence ill give you protection from that word. ill give you the antidote for trouble philosophy. philosophy will comfort you even though youve been banished.$romeo youre still talking about banished forget about philosophy unless philosophy can create a juliet or pick up a town and put it somewhere else or reverse a princes punishment it doesnt do me any good. dont say anything else.$friar lawrence oh so madmen like you are also deaf.$romeo how should madmen hear if wise men cant even see$friar lawrence let me talk to you about your situation.$romeo you cant talk about something that you dont feel. if you were as young as i am if you were in love with juliet if you had just married her an hour ago if then you murdered tybalt if you were lovesick like me and if you were banished then you might talk about it. you might also tear your hair out of your head and collapse to the ground the way i do right now. romeo falls on the ground you might kneel down and measure the grave that hasnt yet been dug.$knocking from offstage.$friar lawrence get up. somebodys knocking. hide yourself good romeo.$modern text$romeo i wont hide unless all the mist from my heartsick groans envelopes me like fog and conceals me from peoples searching eyes.$knocking.$friar lawrence listen theyre still knockingto the person at the door whos thereto romeo romeo get up. theyll arrest you.to the person at the door hold on a moment.to romeo get up.$knocking$run and hide in my study.just a minutefor the love of god why are you being so stupid im coming. im coming.$knocking.$why are you knocking so hard where do you come from what do you want$nurse from offstage let me come in and ill tell you why i came. i come from lady juliet.$friar lawrence opening the door welcome then.$the nurse enters.$nurse oh holy friar oh tell me holy friar where is my ladys husband wheres romeo$modern text$friar lawrence hes there on the ground. hes been getting drunk on his own tears.$nurse oh hes acting just like juliet just like her. oh painful sympathy what a pitiful problem shes lying on the ground just like him blubbering and weeping weeping and blubbering. stand up. stand up. stand up if youre really a man. for juliets sake for her sake rise and stand up. why should you fall into so deep a moan$romeo nurse$nurse ah sir ah sir. well death is the end for everybody.$romeo were you talking about juliet how is she does she think that im a practiced murderer because i tainted our newfound joy by killing one of her close relatives where is she how is she doing what does my hidden wife say about our ruined love$nurse oh she doesnt say anything sir. she just weeps and weeps. she falls on her bed and then starts to get up. then she calls out tybalts name and cries romeo and then she falls down again.$romeo shes calling out my name as if i were a bullet murdering her just like i murdered her relative. tell me friar in what part of my body is my name embedded tell me so i can cut it out of myself. he draws his dagger$modern text$friar lawrence hold on and dont act out of desperation. are you a man you look like a man but your tears make you look like a woman. your wild actions resemble the irrational fury of a beast. youre a shameful woman who looks like a man or else an ugly creature whos halfman halfbeast. you have amazed me. i swear by my holy order i thought you were smarter and more rational than this. have you killed tybalt will you kill yourself and would you also kill your wife who shares your life by committing the sin of killing yourself why do you complain about your birth the heavens and the earth life is the union of soul in body through the miracle of birth but you would throw all that away. you bring shame to your body your love and your mind. you have so much natural talent but like someone who hoards money you use none of your talent for the right purposenot your body not your love not your mind. your body is just a wax figure without the honor of a man. the love that you promised was a hollow lie. youre killing the love that you vowed to cherish. your mind which aids both your body and your love has mishandled both of them. youre like a stupid soldier whose gunpowder explodes because hes careless. the things you were supposed to use to defend yourself end up killing you. get up man your juliet is alive. it was for her that you were almost killed earlier. be happy that shes alive. tybalt wanted to kill you but you killed tybalt. be happy that youre alive. the law that threatened your life was softened into exile. be happy about that. your life is full of blessings. you have the best sorts of happiness to enjoy.$modern text$but like a misbehaved sullen girl youre whining about your bad luck and your love. listen listen people who act like that die miserable. go be with your love as it was decided at your wedding. climb up to her bedroom and comfort her. but get out of there before the night watchmen take their positions. then you will escape to the city of mantua where youll live until we can make your marriage public and make peace between your families. well ask the prince to pardon you. then well welcome you back with twenty thousand times more joy than youll have when you leave this town crying. go ahead nurse. give my regards to your lady and tell her to hurry everybody in the house to bed. im sure theyre all so sad that theyll be ready to sleep. romeo is coming.$nurse o lord i could stay here all night listening to such good advice. educated men are so impressive speaking to romeo my lord ill tell my lady you will come.$romeo do so and tell my sweet to be ready to scold me.$nurse here sir this is a ring she asked me to give you. hurry up its getting late. she gives romeo juliets ring$the nurse exits.$romeo this makes me feel so much better$modern text$friar lawrence now get out of here. good night. everything depends on this either be out of here before the night watchmen take their positions or leave in disguise after daybreak. take a little vacation in mantua. ill find your servant and hell update you now and then on your case as it stands here. give me your hand. its late. farewell. good night.$romeo im off to experience the greatest joy of all but still its sad to leave you in such a rush. farewell.$they exit.$modern text$enter capulet lady capulet and paris$capulet things have turned out so unluckily sir that we havent had time to convince our daughter to marry you. listen she loved her cousin tybalt dearly and so did i. well we were all born to die. its very late she wont be coming downstairs tonight. believe me if you werent here visiting me i myself would have gone to bed an hour ago.$paris these times of pain are bad times for romance. madam good night. give my regards to your daughter.$lady capulet i will. and ill find out what she thinks about marriage early tomorrow. tonight she is shut up in her room alone with her sadness.$capulet sir paris ill make a desperate argument for my childs love. i think shell do whatever i say. no i think shell do all that and more. i have no doubt about it. wife visit her in her room before you go to bed. tell her about my son pariss love for her. and tell her listen to me on wednesdaywaitwhat day is today$paris monday my lord.$capulet monday ha ha well wednesday is too soon. let it be on thursday. on thursday tell her shell be married to this noble earl. will you be ready do you think its a good idea to rush we shouldnt have too big a celebrationwe can invite a friend or two. listen because tybalt was just killed people might think that we dont care about his memory as our relative if we have too grand a party. therefore well have about half a dozen friends to the wedding and thats it. what do you think about thursday$modern text$paris my lord i wish thursday were tomorrow.$capulet well go on home. thursday it is then. to lady capulet visit juliet before you go to bed. get her ready my wife for this wedding day. to paris farewell my lord. now im off to bed. oh my its so late that we might as well call it early. good night.$they all exit.$modern text$romeo and juliet enter above the stage.$juliet are you going its still a long time until daybreak. dont be afraid. that sound you heard was the nightingale the lark sings in the morning the nightingale sings at night. nightingale  not the lark. every night the nightingale chirps on that pomegranatetree. believe me my love it was the nightingale.$romeo it was the lark the bird that sings at dawn not the nightingale. look my love what are those streaks of light in the clouds parting in the east night is over and day is coming. if i want to live i must go. if i stay ill die.$juliet that light is not daylight i know it. its some meteor coming out of the sun to light your way to mantua. so stay for a while. you dont have to go yet.$romeo let me be captured. let me be put to death. i am content if thats the way you want it. ill say the light over there isnt morning. ill say its the reflection of the moon. ill say that sound isnt the lark ringing in the sky. i want to stay more than i want to go. come death and welcome juliet wants it this way. how are you my love lets talk. its not daylight.$modern text$juliet it is it is. get out of here be gone go away its the lark that sings so out of tune making such harsh noise. some say the lark makes a sweet division between day and night. its not true because she separates us. some say the lark traded its eyes with the toad a folktale said that the lark had gotten its ugly eyes from the toad who had taken its pretty eyes from the lark. some say the lark traded its eyes with the toad . oh now i wish they had traded voices too because the larks voice tears us out of each others arms and now there will be men hunting for you. oh go away now. i see more and more light.$romeo more and more light. more and more pain for us.$the nurse enters.$nurse madam.$juliet nurse$nurse your mother is coming to your bedroom. day has broken. be careful. watch out.$the nurse exits.$juliet then the window lets day in and life goes out the window.$romeo farewell farewell give me one kiss and ill go down.$they kiss. romeo drops the ladder and goes down.$modern text$juliet are you gone like that my love my lord yes my husband my friend i must hear from you every day in the hour. in a minute there are many days. oh by this count ill be many years older before i see my romeo again.$romeo farewell i wont miss any chance to send my love to you.$juliet oh do you think well ever meet again$romeo i have no doubts. all these troubles will give us stories to tell each other later in life.$juliet oh god i have a soul that predicts evil things now that you are down there you look like someone dead in the bottom of a tomb. either my eyesight is failing me or you look pale.$romeo and trust me love you look pale to me too. sadness takes away our color. goodbye goodbye$romeo exits.$juliet oh luck luck. everyone says you cant make up your mind. if you change your mind so much what are you going to do to romeo whos so faithful change your mind luck. i hope maybe then youll send him back home soon.$lady capulet offstage hey daughter are you awake$modern text$juliet whos that calling is it my mother isnt she up very late or is she up very early what strange reason could she have for coming here$lady capulet enters.$lady capulet whats going on juliet$juliet madam i am not well.$lady capulet will you cry about your cousins death forever are you trying to wash him out of his grave with tears if you could you couldnt bring him back to life. so stop crying. a little bit of grief shows a lot of love. but too much grief makes you look stupid.$juliet let me keep weeping for such a great loss.$lady capulet you will feel the loss but the man you weep for will feel nothing.$juliet feeling the loss like this i cant help but weep for him forever.$lady capulet well girl youre weeping not for his death as much as for the fact that the villain who killed him is still alive.$juliet what villain madam$lady capulet that villain romeo.$modern text$juliet speaking so that lady capulet cant hear hes far from being a villain. to lady capulet may god pardon him i do with all my heart. and yet no man could make my heart grieve like he does.$lady capulet thats because the murderer is alive.$juliet yes madam he lies beyond my reach. i wish that no one could avenge my cousins death except me$lady capulet well have revenge for it. dont worry about that. stop crying. ill send a man to mantua where that exiled rogue is living. our man will poison romeos drink and romeo will join tybalt in death. and then i hope youll be satisfied.$juliet ill never be satisfied with romeo until i see him . . . deaddead is how my poor heart feels when i think about my poor cousin. madam if you can find a man to deliver the poison ill mix it myself so that romeo will sleep quietly soon after he drinks it. oh how i hate to hear people say his name and not be able to go after him. i want to take the love i had for my cousin and take it out on the body of the man who killed him.$lady capulet find out the way and ill find the right man. but now i have joyful news for you girl.$juliet and its good to have joy in such a joyless time. whats the news please tell me.$modern text$lady capulet well well you have a careful father child. he has arranged a sudden day of joy to end your sadness. a day that you did not expect and that i did not seek out.$juliet madam tell me quickly what day is that$lady capulet indeed my child at saint peters church early thursday morning the gallant young and noble gentleman count paris will happily make you a joyful bride.$juliet now i swear by saint peters church and peter too he will not make me a joyful bride there. this is a strange rush. how can i marry him this husband before he comes to court me please tell my father madam i wont marry yet. and when i do marry i swear it will be romeo whom you know i hate rather than paris. thats really news$lady capulet here comes your father. tell him so yourself and see how he takes the news.$capulet and the nurse enter.$capulet when the sun sets the air drizzles dew. but at the death of my brothers son it rains a downpour. what are you girl some kind of fountain why are you still crying will you cry forever in one little body you seem like a ship the sea and the winds. your eyes which i call the sea flow with tears. the ship is your body which is sailing on the salt flood of your tears. the winds are your sighs. your sighs and your tears are raging. unless you calm down tears and sighs will overwhelm your body and sink your ship. so where do things stand wife have you told her our decision$modern text$lady capulet yes sir i told her. but she wont agree. she says thank you but refuses. i wish the fool were dead and married to her grave$capulet wait hold on wife. i dont understand. how can this be she refuses isnt she grateful isnt she proud of such a match doesnt she realize what a blessing this is doesnt she realize how unworthy she is of the gentleman we have found to be her bridegroom$juliet i am not proud of what you have found for me. but i am thankful that you have found it. i can never be proud of what i hate. but i can be thankful for something i hate if it was meant with love.$capulet what is this what is this fuzzy logic what is this i hear you say proud and i thank you and then no thank you and not proud you spoiled little girl. youre not really giving me any thanks or showing me any pride. but get yourself ready for thursday. youre going to saint peters church to marry paris. and if you dont go on your own ill drag you there. you disgust me you little bug you worthless girl you pale face$lady capulet shame on you what are you crazy$juliet good father im begging you on my knees be patient and listen to me say just one thing.$modern text$capulet forget about you you worthless girl you disobedient wretch ill tell you what. go to church on thursday or never look me in the face again. dont say anything. dont reply. dont talk back to me. juliet rises i feel like slapping you. wife we never thought ourselves blessed that god only gave us this one child. but now i see that this one is one too many. we were cursed when we had her. she disgusts me the little hussy$nurse god in heaven bless her my lord youre wrong to berate her like that.$capulet and why wise lady you shut up old woman. go blabber with your gossiping friends.$nurse ive said nothing wrong.$capulet oh for gods sake.$nurse cant i say something$capulet be quiet you mumbling fool say your serious things at lunch with your gossiping friends. we dont need to hear it.$lady capulet youre getting too angry.$capulet goddammit it makes me mad. day and night hour after hour all the time at work at play alone in company my top priority has always been to find her a husband. now ive provided a husband from a noble family who is goodlooking young welleducated. hes full of good qualities. hes the man of any girls dreams. but this wretched whimpering fool like a whining puppet she looks at this good fortune and answers i wont get married. i cant fall in love. im too young. please excuse me. well if you wont get married ill excuse you. eat wherever you want but you can no longer live under my roof. consider that. think about it. im not in the habit of joking. thursday is coming. put your hand on your heart and listen to my advice. if you act like my daughter ill marry you to my friend. if you dont act like my daughter you can beg starve and die in the streets. i swear on my soul i will never take you back or do anything for you. believe me. think about it. i wont break this promise.$modern text$capulet exits.$juliet is there no pity in the sky that can see my sadness oh my sweet mother dont throw me out delay this marriage for a month or a week. or if you dont delay make my wedding bed in the tomb where tybalt lies.$lady capulet dont talk to me because i wont say a word. do as you please because im done worrying about you.$lady capulet exits.$juliet oh godoh nurse how can this be stopped my husband is alive on earth my vows of marriage are in heaven. how can i bring those promises back down to earth unless my husband sends them back down to me by dying and going to heaven give me comfort. give me advice. oh no oh no why does heaven play tricks on someone as weak as me what do you say dont you have one word of joy give me some comfort nurse.$modern text$nurse this is what i have to say romeo has been banished. and its a sure thing that he will never come back to challenge you. if he does come back hell have to sneak back undercover. then since things are the way they are i think the best thing to do is to marry the count. oh hes a lovely gentleman romeos a dishcloth compared to him. madam an eagle does not have eyes as green as quick and as fair as the eyes of paris. curse my very heart but i think you should be happy in this second marriage because its better than your first. even if its not better your first marriage is over. or if romeo is as good as paris romeo doesnt live here so you dont get to enjoy him.$juliet are you speaking from your heart$nurse i speak from my heart and from my soul too. if not curse them both.$juliet amen$nurse what$juliet well you have given me great comfort. go inside and tell my mother that im gone. i made my father angry so i went to friar lawrences cell to confess and be forgiven.$nurse alright i will. this is a good idea.$the nurse exits.$modern text$juliet that damned old lady oh that most wicked fiend is it a worse sin for her to want me to break my vows or for her to say bad things about my husband after she praised him so many times before away with you and your advice nurse. from now on i will never tell you what i feel in my heart. im going to the friar to find out his solution. if everything else fails at least i have the power to take my own life.$juliet exits.$modern text$friar lawrence and parisenter.$friar lawrence on thursday sir thats very soon.$paris thats how my future fatherinlaw capulet wants it and im not dragging my feet.$friar lawrence you say you dont know what the girl thinks. thats a rocky road to be riding. i dont like it.$paris shes grieving too much over the death of tybalt. so i havent had the chance to talk to her about love. romantic love doesnt happen when people are in mourning. now sir her father thinks its dangerous that she allows herself to become so sad. hes being smart by rushing our marriage to stop her from crying. she cries too much by herself. if she had someone to be with her she would stop crying. now you know the reason for the rush.$friar lawrence to himself i wish i didnt know the reason why the marriage should be slowed down. look sir here comes the lady walking toward my cell.$juliet enters.$paris im happy to meet you my lady and my wife.$juliet that might be the case sir after im married.$modern text$paris that may be must be love on thursday.$juliet what must be will be.$friar lawrence that is a certain truth.$paris have you come to make confession to this father$juliet if i answered that question id be making confession to you.$paris dont deny to him that you love me.$juliet ill confess to you that i love him.$paris you will also confess im sure that you love me.$juliet if i do so it will mean more if i say it behind your back than if i say it to your face.$paris you poor soul your face has suffered many tears.$juliet the tears havent done much because my face looked bad enough before i started to cry.$paris youre treating your face even worse by saying that.$juliet what i say isnt slander sir. its the truth. and what i said i said to my face.$paris your face is mine and you have slandered it.$juliet that may be the case because my face doesnt belong to me.do you have time for me now father or should i come to you at evening mass$modern text$friar lawrence i have time for you now my sad daughter. to paris my lord we must ask you to leave us alone.$paris god forbid that i should prevent sacred devotion juliet i will wake you early on thursday. kissing her until then goodbye and keep this holy kiss.$paris exits.$juliet oh shut the door and after you shut it come over here and weep with me. this mess is beyond hope beyond cure beyond help$friar lawrence oh juliet i already know about your sad situation. its a problem too hard for me to solve. i hear that you must marry this count on thursday and that nothing can delay it.$juliet dont tell me that youve heard about this marriage friar unless you can tell me how to prevent it. if you who are so wise cant help please be kind enough to call my solution wise. she shows him a knife and ill solve the problem now with this knife. god joined my heart to romeos. you joined our hands. and before iwho was married to romeo by youam married to another man ill kill myself. you are wise and you have so much experience. give me some advice about the current situation. or watch. caught between these two difficulties ill act like a judge with my bloody knife. i will truly and honorably resolve the situation that you cant fix despite your experience and education. dont wait long to speak. i want to die if what you say isnt another solution.$modern text$friar lawrence hold on daughter i see some hope. but we must act boldly because the situation is so desperate. if youve made up your mind to kill yourself instead of marrying count paris then youll probably be willing to try something like death to solve this shameful problem. you can wrestle with death to escape from shame. and if you dare to do it ill give you the solution.$juliet oh you can tell me to jump off the battle posts of any tower or to walk down the crimeridden streets of a slum. or tell me to sit in a field full of poisonous snakes. chain me up with wild bears. hide me every night in a morgue full of dead bodies with wet smelly flesh and skulls without jawbones. or tell me to climb down into a freshly dug grave and hide me with a dead man in his tomb. all those ideas make me tremble when i hear them named. but i will do them without fear or dread in order to be a pure wife to my sweet love.$friar lawrence hold on then. go home be cheerful and tell them you agree to marry paris. tomorrow is wednesday. tomorrow night make sure that you are alone. dont let the nurse stay with you in your bedroom. showing her a vial when youre in bed take this vial mix its contents with liquor and drink. then a cold sleepinducing drug will run through your veins and your pulse will stop. your flesh will be cold and youll stop breathing. the red in your lips and your cheeks will turn pale and your eyes will shut. it will seem like youre dead. you wont be able to move and your body will be stiff like a corpse. youll remain in this deathlike state for fortytwo hours and then youll wake up as if from a pleasant sleep. now when the bridegroom comes to get you out of bed on thursday morning youll seem dead. then as tradition demands youll be dressed up in your best clothes put in an open coffin and carried to the capulet family tomb. meanwhile ill send romeo word of our plan. hell come here and well keep a watch for when you wake up. that night romeo will take you away to mantua. this plan will free you from the shameful situation that troubles you now as long as you dont change your mind or become scared like a silly woman and ruin your brave effort.$modern text$juliet give me the vial. give it to me dont talk to me about fear.$friar lawrence giving her the vial now go along on your way. be strong and successful in this decision. ill send a friar quickly to mantua with my letter for romeo.$juliet love will give me strength and strength will help me accomplish this plan. goodbye dear father.$they exit separately.$modern text$capulet enters with lady capulet the nurse and two or three servingmen.$capulet giving the first servingman a piece of paper invite all the guests on this list.$the first servingman exits.$to second servingman boy go hire twenty skilled cooks.$second servingman you wont get any bad cooks from me. ill test them by making them lick their fingers.$capulet how can you test them like that$second servingman easy sir. its a bad cook who cant lick his own fingers. so the cooks who cant lick their fingers arent hired.$capulet go get out of here.$the second servingman exits.$were unprepared for this wedding celebration. to the nurse what has my daughter gone to see friar lawrence$nurse yes thats true.$capulet well theres a chance he may do her some good. shes a stubborn little brat.$juliet enters.$modern text$nurse look shes come home from confession with a happy look on her face.$capulet so my headstrong daughter where have you been$juliet i went somewhere where i learned that being disobedient to my father is a sin. holy father lawrence instructed me to fall on my knees and beg your forgiveness. she kneels down forgive me i beg you. from now on ill do whatever you say.$capulet send for the count. go tell him about this. ill make this wedding happen tomorrow morning.$juliet i met the young man at lawrences cell. i treated him with the proper love as well as i could while still being modest.$capulet well im glad about this. this is good. stand up.$juliet stands up.$this is the way it should be. i want to see the count. yes alright go i say and bring him here. now before god our whole city owes this friar a great debt.$juliet nurse will you come with me to my closet and help me pick out the clothes and the jewelry ill need to wear tomorrow$modern text$lady capulet no not until thursday. theres plenty of time.$capulet go nurse go with her. well have the wedding at the church tomorrow.$juliet and the nurse exit.$lady capulet our supplies will be short for the party. its already almost night.$capulet dont worry i will set things in motion. and everything will be alright i promise you wife. you should go to juliet and dress her up. im not going to bed tonight. leave me alone. ill pretend to be the housewife for once.$lady capulet exits.$hey what theyre all gone well i will walk by myself to count paris to get him ready for tomorrow. my heart is wonderfully happy because this troubled girl has been taken back and now will be married.$capulet exits.$modern text$juliet and the nurse enter.$juliet yes those are the best clothes. but gentle nurse please leave me alone tonight. i have to say a lot of prayers to make the heavens bless me. you know that my life is troubled and full of sin.$lady capulet enters.$lady capulet what are you busy do you need my help$juliet no madam weve figured out the best things for me to wear tomorrow at the ceremony. so if its okay with you id like to be left alone now. let the nurse sit up with you tonight. im sure you have your hands full preparing for the sudden festivities.$lady capulet good night. go to bed and get some rest. im sure you need it.$lady capulet and the nurse exit.$juliet goodbye. only god knows when well meet again. there is a slight cold fear cutting through my veins. it almost freezes the heat of life. ill call them back here to comfort me. nurseoh what good would she do here in my desperate situation i have to act alone.$modern text$alright heres the vial. what if this mixture doesnt work at all will i be married tomorrow morning no no this knife will stop it. lie down right there. she lays down the knife what if the friar mixed the potion to kill me is he worried that he will be disgraced if i marry paris after he married me to romeo im afraid that its poison. and yet it shouldnt be poison because he is a trustworthy holy man. what if when i am put in the tomb i wake up before romeo comes to save me thats a frightening idea. wont i suffocate in the tomb theres no healthy air to breathe in there. will i die of suffocation before romeo comes or if i live ill be surrounded by death and darkness. it will be terrible. there will be bones hundreds of years old in that tomb my ancestors' bones. tybalts body will be in there freshly entombed and his corpse will be rotting. they say that during the night the spirits are in tombs. oh no oh no. ill wake up and smell awful odors. ill hear screams that would drive people crazy.$modern text$if i wake up too early wont i go insane with all these horrible frightening things around me start playing with my ancestors' bones and pull tybalts corpse out of his death shroud will i grab one of my dead ancestors bones and bash in my own skull oh look i think i see my cousin tybalts ghost. hes looking for romeo because romeo killed him with his sword. wait tybalt wait romeo romeo romeo heres a drink. i drink to you.$she drinks from the vial and falls on her bed hidden by her bed curtains.$modern text$lady capulet and the nurse enter.$lady capulet wait. take these keys and get more spices nurse.$nurse theyre calling for dates and quinces in the pastry kitchen.$capulet enters.$capulet come on wake up wake up wake up the second cock crowed. the curfewbell rang. its three o'clock. go get the baked meats good angelica. dont worry about the cost.$nurse go you old housewife go. go to bed dear. youll be sick tomorrow because youve stayed up all night.$capulet no not at all. what ive stayed up all night many times before for less important matters and ive never gotten sick.$lady capulet yes youve been a ladies' man in your time. but ill make sure you dont stay up any later now.$lady capulet and the nurse exit.$capulet a jealous woman a jealous woman$three or four servingmen enter with spits logs and baskets.$now fellow what have you got there$modern text$first servingman things for the cook sir. but i dont know what they are.$capulet hurry up hurry up.$the first servingman exits.$to second servingman you fetch logs that are drier than these. call peter hell show you where they are.$second servingman im smart enough to find the logs myself without bothering peter.$the second servingman exits.$capulet right and well said. that guys funny. hes got a head full of logs. goodness its daylight. the count will be here soon with music. at least he said he would. i hear him coming near.$music plays offstage.$nurse wife what hey nurse$the nurse returns.$go wake juliet. go and get her dressed. ill go and chat with paris. hey hurry up hurry up the bridegroom is already here. hurry up i say.$they exit.$modern text$the nurse enters.$nurse mistress hey mistress juliet i bet shes fast asleep. hey lamb hey lady hey you lazy bones hey love i say madam sweetheart hey bride what you dont say a word you take your beauty sleep now. get yourself a weeks worth of sleep. tomorrow night i bet count paris wont let you get much rest. god forgive me. alright and amen. how sound asleep she is i must wake her up. madam madam madam yes let the count take you in your bed. hell wake you up i bet. wont he she opens the bed curtains what youre still dressed in all your clothes. but youre still asleep. i must wake you up. lady lady lady oh no oh no help help my ladys dead oh curse the day that i was born ho get me some brandy my lord my lady$lady capulet enters.$lady capulet whats all the noise in here$nurse oh sad day$lady capulet what is the matter$nurse look look oh what a sad day$modern text$lady capulet oh my oh my my child my reason for living wake up look up or ill die with you help help call for help.$capulet enters.$capulet for shame bring juliet out here. her bridegroom is here.$nurse shes dead deceased shes dead. curse the day$lady capulet curse the day shes dead shes dead shes dead$capulet no let me see her. oh no shes cold. her blood has stopped and her joints are stiff. shes been dead for some time. shes dead like a beautiful flower killed by an unseasonable frost.$nurse oh sad day$lady capulet oh this is a painful time$capulet death which has taken her away to make me cry now ties up my tongue and wont let me speak.$friar lawrence and paris enter with musicians.$friar lawrence come is the bride ready to go to church$capulet shes ready to go but shell never return. to paris oh son on the night before your wedding day death has taken your wife. there she lies. she was a flower but death deflowered her.$modern text$death is my soninlaw. death is my heir. my daughter married death. i will die and leave death everything. life wealth everything belongs to death.$paris have i waited so long to see this morning only to see this$lady capulet accursed unhappy wretched hateful day this is the most miserable hour of all time i had only one child one poor child one poor and loving child the one thing i had to rejoice and comfort myself and cruel death has stolen it from me$nurse oh pain oh painful painful painful day the saddest day most painful day that i ever ever did behold oh day oh day oh day oh hateful day there has never been so black a day as today. oh painful day oh painful day$paris she was tricked divorced wronged spited killed death the most despicable thing tricked her. cruel cruel death killed her. oh love oh life there is no life but my love is dead$capulet despised distressed hated martyred killed why did this have to happen now why did death have to ruin our wedding oh child oh child my soul and not my child you are dead oh no my child is dead. my child will be buried and so will my joys.$friar lawrence be quiet for shame the cure for confusion is not yelling and screaming. you had this child with the help of heaven. now heaven has her.$modern text$she is in a better place. you could not prevent her from dying someday but heaven will give her eternal life. the most you hope for was for her to marry wealthy and rise up the social ladderthat was your idea of heaven. and now you cry even though she has risen up above the clouds as high as heaven itself oh in this love you love your child so badly that you go mad even though she is in heaven. it is best to marry well and die young better than to be married for a long time. dry up your tears and put your rosemary on this beautiful corpse. and in accordance with custom carry her to the church in her best clothes. its natural for us to shed tears for her but the truth is we should be happy for her.$capulet all the things that we prepared for the wedding party will now be used for the funeral. our happy music will now be sad. our wedding banquet will become a sad burial feast. our celebratory hymns will change to sad funeral marches. our bridal flowers will cover a buried corpse. and everything will be used for the opposite purpose from what we intended.$friar lawrence sir you go in. and madam go with him. and you go too sir paris. everyone prepare to take this beautiful corpse to her grave. the heavens hang threateningly over you for some past sin. dont disturb the heavens any more by trying to go against heavens will.$capulet lady capulet paris and friar lawrence exit.$first musician well we can put away our pipes and go home.$modern text$nurse honest good boys ah put 'em away put 'em away. as you know this is a sad case.$the nurse exits.$first musician yes well things could get better.$peter enters.$peter musicians oh musicians play hearts ease hearts ease. oh ill die if you dont play hearts ease.$first musician why hearts ease$peter oh musicians because my heart is singing my heart is full of woe. oh play me some happy sad song to comfort me.$first musician no not a sad song. its not the right time to play.$peter you wont then$first musician no.$peter then ill really give it to you.$first musician what will you give us$peter no money i swear. but ill play a trick on you. ill call you a minstrel.$first musician then ill call you a servingcreature.$modern text$peter then ill smack you on the head with the servingcreatures knife. i wont mess around. ill make you sing. do you hear me$first musician if you make us sing youll hear us.$second musician please put down your knife and stop kidding around.$peter so you dont like my kidding around ill kid you to death and then ill put down my knife. answer me like men.$sings when sadness wounds your heart and pain takes over your mind then music with her silver sound$speaks why the line silver sound what do they mean music with her silver sound what do you say simon catling catling = a violin string catling $first musician well sir because silver has a sweet sound.$peter thats a stupid answer what do you say hugh rebeck rebeck = a fiddle rebeck $second musician i say silver sound because musicians play to earn silver.$peter another studpid answer what do you say james soundpost soundpost = part of a violin soundpost $third musician well i dont know what to say.$modern text$peter oh i beg your pardon. youre the singer. ill answer for you. it is music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold to use to make sounds.$sings then music with her silver sound makes you feel just fine.$peter exits.$first musician what an annoying man this guy is$second musician forget about him jack come well go in there. well wait for the mourners and stay for dinner.$the musicians exit.$modern text$romeo enters.$romeo if i can trust my dreams then some joyful news is coming soon. love rules my heart and all day long a strange feeling has been making me cheerful. i had a dream that my lady came and found me dead. its a strange dream that lets a dead man think she came and brought me back to life by kissing my lips. i rose from the dead and was an emperor. oh my how sweet it would be to actually have the woman i love when merely thinking about love makes me so happy.$romeos servant balthasar enters.$do you have news from veronawhat is it balthasar do you bring me a letter from the friar how is my wife is my father well how is my juliet i ask that again because nothing can be wrong if she is well.$balthasar then she is well and nothing is wrong. her body sleeps in the capulet tomb and her immortal soul lives with the angels in heaven. i saw her buried in her familys tomb and then i came here to tell you the news. oh pardon me for bringing this bad news but you told me it was my job sir.$modern text$romeo is it really true then i rebel against you stars you know where i live. get me some ink and paper and hire some horses to ride. i will leave here for verona tonight.$balthasar please sir have patience. you look pale and wild as if youre going to hurt yourself.$romeo tsk youre wrong. leave me and do what i told you to do. dont you have a letter for me from the friar$balthasar no my good lord.$romeo no matter. get on your way and hire those horses. ill be with you right away.$balthasar exits.$well juliet ill lie with you tonight. lets see how. destructive thoughts come quickly to the minds of desperate men i remember a pharmacist who lives nearby. i remember he wears shabby clothes and has bushy eyebrows. he makes drugs from herbs. he looks poor and miserable and worn out to the bone. he had a tortoise shell hanging up in his shop as well as a stuffed alligator and other skins of strange fish. there were a few empty boxes on his shelves as well as green clay pots and some musty seeds. there were a few strands of string and mashed rose petals on display.$modern text$noticing all this poverty i said to myself if a man needed some poisonwhich they would immediately kill you for selling in mantuahere is a miserable wretch whod sell it to him. oh this idea came before i needed the poison. but this same poor man must sell it to me. as i remember this should be the house. todays a holiday so the beggars shop is shut. hey pharmacist$the apothecary enters.$apothecary whos that calling so loud$romeo come here man. i see that you are poor. here are forty ducats. let me have a shot of poison something that works so fast that the person who takes it will die as fast as gunpowder exploding in a canon.$apothecary i have lethal poisons like that. but its against the law to sell them in mantua and the penalty is death.$romeo youre this poor and wretched and still afraid to die your cheeks are thin because of hunger. i can see in your eyes that youre starving. anyone can see that youre a beggar. the world is not your friend and neither is the law. the world doesnt make laws to make you rich. so dont be poor. break the law and take this money. he holds out money$modern text$apothecary i agree because im poor not because i want to.$romeo i pay you because youre poor not because you want me to buy this.$apothecary gives romeo poison put this in any kind of liquid you want and drink it down. even if you were as strong as twenty men it would kill you immediately.$romeo gives apothecary money there is your gold. money is a worse poison to mens souls and commits more murders in this awful world than these poor poisons that youre not allowed to sell. ive sold you poison. you havent sold me any. goodbye. buy yourself food and put some flesh on your bones. ill take this mixture which is a medicine not a poison to juliets grave. thats where i must use it.$they exit.$modern text$friar john enters.$friar john holy franciscan friar brother hey$friar lawrence enters.$friar lawrence that sounds like the voice of friar john. welcome back from mantua. what does romeo say or if he wrote down his thoughts give me his letter.$friar john i went to find another poor friar from our order to accompany me. he was here in this city visiting the sick. when i found him the town health officials suspected that we were both in a house that had been hit with the plague. they quarantined the house sealed up the doors and refused to let us out. i couldnt go to mantua because i was stuck there.$friar lawrence then who took my letter to romeo$friar john i couldnt send it. here it is. he gives friar lawrence a letter i couldnt get a messenger to bring it to you either because they were scared of spreading the infection.$friar lawrence unhappy fortune by my brotherhood the letter was not just a nice greeting. it was full of very important information. its very dangerous that it hasnt been sent. friar john go and get me an iron crowbar. bring it straight back to my cell.$modern text$friar john brother ill go and bring it to you.$friar john exits.$friar lawrence now i must go to the tomb alone. within three hours juliet will wake up. shell be very angry with me that romeo doesnt know what happened. but ill write again to mantua and ill keep her in my cell until romeo comes. that poor living corpse. shes shut inside a dead mans tomb$friar lawrence exits.$modern text$paris enters with his page.$paris give me your torch boy. go away and stay apart from me. put the torch out so i cant be seen. hide under the yewtrees over there. listen to make sure no one is coming through the graveyard. if you hear any one whistle to me to signal that someone is approaching. give me those flowers. do as i tell you. go.$the page puts out the torch and gives paris the flowers.$page to himself i am almost afraid to stand alone here in the graveyard but ill take the risk.$the page moves aside$paris he scatters flowers at juliets closed tomb sweet flower im spreading flowers over your bridal bed. oh pain your canopy is dust and stones. ill water these flowers every night with sweet water. or if i dont do that my nightly rituals to remember you will be to put flowers on your grave and weep.$the page whistles$the boy is warning me that someone approaches. who could be walking around here tonight whos ruining my rituals of true love its someone with a torch i must hide in the darkness for awhile.$
